<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>1: The Power of Knowing, Overcoming Dyslexia</title>
		<link href="../css/prhStyle.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/prhStyle-media-queries.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/9780307558893_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<meta charset="utf-8"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:d230f54c-5167-4f8b-bb76-7426d9045212" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
	</head>
	<body>
		<div class="page_top_padding" id="c01">
			<h1 class="chap_number"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_2" title="2"/><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_3" title="3"/><b>1</b></h1>
			<p class="line"> </p>
			<h1 class="chap_title"><b>THE POWER OF KNOWING</b></h1>
			<p>
				This book is about reading—an extraordinary ability, peculiarly human and yet distinctly unnatural. It is acquired in childhood, forms an intrinsic part of our existence as civilized beings, and is taken for granted by most of us. The unspoken belief is that if, as a child, you are sufficiently motivated and come from a home in which reading is valued, you will learn to read with ease. But as with so many other assumptions that appear to make intuitive sense, the assumption that reading comes naturally and easily to all children is simply not true. A substantial number of well-intentioned boys and girls—including very bright ones—experience significant difficulty in learning to read, through no fault of their own. This frustrating and persistent problem in learning to read is called <i>dyslexia.</i></p>
			<p class="indent">Most children look forward to learning to read and, in fact, do so quickly. For dyslexic children, however, the experience is very different. For them, reading, which seems to come effortlessly for everyone else, appears to be beyond their grasp. These children, who understand the spoken word and may love to listen to stories, cannot decipher the same words when they are written on a page. They grow frustrated and disappointed. Teachers wonder what they or the child is doing wrong, often misdiagnosing the problem or giving bad advice. Parents question themselves, feeling alternately guilty and angry.</p>
			<p class="indent"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_4" title="4"/>It is for these parents, teachers, and children that I am writing this book. Exhilarated by new scientific discoveries about reading and dyslexia and frustrated by the relative lack of dissemination and practical application of these remarkable advances, I want to share with you all that I know about the science of reading. I want to make it very clear that it is now possible with a high degree of accuracy to screen for and then to identify children with dyslexia early on and to treat and remediate their difficulties, helping them learn to read. We can also do more than ever before for teenagers, young adults, and older adults.</p>
			<p class="indent">As virulent as any virus that courses through tissues and organs, dyslexia can infiltrate every aspect of a person’s life. It is often described as a <i>hidden</i> disability, but dyslexia is hidden only to those who do not have to live with it and suffer its effects. If you have a broken arm, an X-ray provides visible evidence; if you are diabetic, a blood glucose measurement confirms it. Heretofore, reading difficulties could be explained away in any number of ways. Now, however, men and women with dyslexia can point to an image of their brain’s internal workings made possible by new brain imaging technology and say, <i>Here, look at this, this is the root cause of my problem.</i> We know now exactly where (and how) dyslexia manifests itself in the brain.</p>
			<p class="indent">The harsh realities of the day-in, day-out experience of living with dyslexia can often clash dramatically with the perceptions of those teachers, administrators, acquaintances, and an array of self-appointed opinion-makers who question the very existence of the disorder that holds so many captive. Some still claim that dyslexia doesn’t exist. They ascribe children’s reading problems entirely to sociological or educational factors and totally deny the biology. Those who question the validity of dyslexia declare that there is no scientific evidence supporting either a biological or a cognitive basis to the disorder and contend that students with dyslexia reap the benefits of special treatment associated with their misdiagnosis.</p>
			<p class="indent">These benefits seem to have been lost on Matthew,<sup><a epub:type="noteref" href="#c01-ftn-1" id="c01-ftn1" role="doc-noteref">*</a></sup> a fifty-four-year-old marketing manager, who said to me, “I feel I have been sentenced for a crime I didn’t even know I had committed.” George, a student at the University of Colorado, described dyslexia as “the beast,” an unknown predator that silently stalks him, continually disrupting his life. Not knowing why causes him great pain, including grades on examinations that reflect neither the <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_5" title="5"/>hours he spends studying nor his considerable fund of knowledge, nor his high level of intelligence. George wants to see “the face of the beast,” to understand why this is happening to him. In addition to this deep desire to comprehend the nature of the mysterious problem enveloping him, he harbors a pervasive fear of being discovered, and of being severely embarrassed, as a dyslexic. Not knowing what to expect from his dyslexia or when the difficulty will manifest itself fills George with a constant sense of apprehension: “It’s like it’s lying there waiting for me to make a wrong move, and then all of a sudden it’s there, taunting me again.”</p>
			<p class="indent">This all-too-common experience is now unnecessary. We know why dyslexics, no matter how bright and motivated, experience reading difficulties. Dyslexia is a complex problem with its roots in the very basic brain systems that allow humans to understand and to express language. By discovering how a disruption in these fundamental neural circuits for coding language gives rise to a reading impairment, we have been able to understand how the tentacles of the disorder reach out from deep within the brain and affect not only how you read but, surprisingly, a range of other important functions as well, including your ability to spell words, to retrieve words, to articulate words, and to remember certain facts. For the first time since dyslexia was initially described more than a century ago, scientists can see the “face of the beast,” and we are now well on our way to taming and taking command of it.</p>
			<p class="indent">I remember spending hours trying to convince Charlotte, a first-year law student who is dyslexic, to seek accommodations for her upcoming final exams. Charlotte was brilliant but was an incredibly slow reader who needed and deserved more than the allotted time. Her professors respected her, and she was sure to make <i>Law Review</i>—unless, she thought, it became known that she was dyslexic. With all the stereotyped views of dyslexia, she reasoned, her professors would have second thoughts about her abilities. Charlotte anguished over the decision: “If I ask for or take extra time, they’ll all think I don’t deserve my grade and that I’m really not so smart. If I don’t take the extra time, I’ll never finish.” For Charlotte and others like her, so-called “special treatment” is a cruel irony.</p>
			<hr class="transition"/>
			<div aria-hidden="true" class="transition">—</div>
			<p>
				I often lecture about dyslexia, and each time I am asked, <i>Where can I read about what you have just said? Where can I get this information? Have you a book to recommend?</i></p>
			<p class="indent">I originally wrote <i>Overcoming Dyslexia</i> in response to these questions <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_6" title="6"/>and all the other questions I’ve never been able to answer in person. I am extremely pleased now to share with you in this second edition the phenomenal outpouring of cutting-edge scientific data increasing our understanding of dyslexia still further, and with it our ability to improve the lives of all children and now adults, too, who are dyslexic. I want to lift the barrier of ignorance surrounding dyslexia and replace it with the wonderful comfort of knowledge, and to empower each and every parent to know, first, what is best for your child, and second, what you can do to ensure that he or she becomes a reader.</p>
			<p class="indent">In this second edition, my aim has been to bridge the enormous chasm that exists between what we are learning in the laboratory and what is being applied in the classroom. The field of neuroscience is exploding. Recent advances in our understanding of brain mechanisms underlying reading are nothing short of revolutionary. Alas, much of the time it feels like this new information is a well-kept secret. In an era when we can image the brain as an individual reads and literally see the brain at work, it is unacceptable to have children (and adults) struggle to read without the benefit of what this modern neuroscience has taught us.</p>
			<p class="indent">As a working scientist and physician specializing in dyslexia and attention disorders, I have cared for dyslexic children for more than four decades. It is these boys and girls and their parents who serve as the inspiration for all my work. In science there are those whose interest is keenest in the theoretical questions surrounding a disorder rather than the clinical entity itself. Similarly, there are fine physicians who understand the clinical disorder and its effect on patients but who are far less familiar with the latest scientific developments. From my experience, I know that to help children and adults with dyslexia most effectively, we need the contributions of both of these often disparate worlds of knowledge. So another of my goals in writing this book is to bring to the reader a new level of scientific understanding of dyslexia. Once you understand dyslexia, its symptoms and treatment will make sense to you. There will be no mystery, and you will be in charge. You will be liberated to reason and to determine on the basis of this new knowledge what is best for you, your child, or your student. It has been an enormous satisfaction to me that I have been able to help so many parents to understand, in very clear and logical terms, what dyslexia is, how to identify it, what causes it, and, most critically, what can be done to help.</p>
			<p class="indent">We now know that dyslexia is a very common problem, affecting one out <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_7" title="7"/>of every five children—10 million in America alone. In every neighborhood and in every classroom worldwide, there are children struggling to read. For many affected children dyslexia has extinguished the joys of childhood.</p>
			<p class="indent">Caitlyn was almost one of these children. I received a call from her grandfather, Adam, a college friend of mine, now a pediatrician in northern California, asking if I could see his grandchild. Caitlyn, seven years old and just then completing first grade, couldn’t seem to catch on to reading. As Adam told me, “I always thought she was as smart as a whip. It just doesn’t make any sense to me. Her mother, Esther, is beside herself. She would do anything for Caitlyn, but neither she nor anyone else seems to know what to do.”</p>
			<p class="indent">Once I saw Caitlyn, it was apparent why her mother was so upset. Caitlyn, after two full years of formal schooling, had not yet mastered beginning reading. She had memorized a few words that she could read by rote, but if shown a new word, Caitlyn could barely begin to sound it out. Instead she would call out words she knew, which generally had no relation to the word on the page. Sometimes she knew the first letter; for example, when shown the word <i>boy,</i> Caitlyn blurted out <i>bat.</i> Overall, out of twenty-four words that a first-grader should have mastered, Caitlyn knew four. Perhaps most frustrating to Esther was the attitude of the school. The principal acted as if Esther had some unspecified emotional problems; the school guidance counselor suggested that she was an overly anxious mother. But no one at the school seemed to be doing anything to address Caitlyn’s lack of progress in reading. All her school reports spoke of her good behavior, noting that her progress was “good for someone at her level.” “Now,” Esther asked, “what does that mean?” Her requests for meetings with school personnel were ignored or slow to be acted upon. The few conferences that were held focused more on Esther’s “emotional needs” than on Caitlyn’s academic needs. Esther came to question herself, and watched her once cheerful daughter grow increasingly withdrawn.</p>
			<p class="indent">The breaking point came during Caitlyn’s seventh birthday party. Esther had worked hard to make it special. All through the party, Caitlyn kept asking, “When do I get to blow out my candles?” Suddenly the room was darkened and Esther came out with a cake with seven glittering candles sparkling brightly. Caitlyn ran over to the table, climbed up on a chair, and bent over the cake. She closed her eyes tightly, concentrated very hard, and then blew out all the candles. Then she ran up the stairs and closed her bedroom door. After some time had passed, Esther found Caitlyn on her bed, her favorite storybook, <i>Goodnight Moon,</i> open on her lap and tears streaming down her <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_8" title="8"/>face. “You said I would get any wish I wanted and you were wrong—my wish didn’t come true.” Caitlyn still could not read any of the words on the page.</p>
			<p class="indent">Caitlyn, of course, is dyslexic. She had difficulty pronouncing long names and trouble finding the right word to say. She had long pauses and many <i>um</i>’s when she was speaking. Her inability to identify some letters of the alphabet persisted. All these symptoms were consistent with the results of a series of state-of-the-art tests specifically designed to determine if a young child is dyslexic. I sat down with Esther and talked to her at length about Caitlyn and dyslexia. From experience, I knew how important it was for Esther to understand, at the most basic level possible, what a diagnosis of dyslexia meant for her daughter. I knew that once Esther grasped the information, she would become a powerful and highly effective advocate for her child.</p>
			<p class="indent">Esther and Caitlyn went back to California with not only a diagnosis but, most important, a plan of action, a detailed program designed to overcome Caitlyn’s reading difficulty. Esther now fully understood why Caitlyn could not read and exactly what needed to be done to fix that. Equally important, based on our new understanding of dyslexia, Esther was now also aware of Caitlyn’s significant strengths and how these, often overlooked, could be called into play to help her read.</p>
			<p class="indent">Esther followed through on our plan. She made sure that her daughter received the specific reading instruction that Caitlyn required. A year later, Esther was excited to share with me the news that Caitlyn had made dramatic progress. No longer a little girl for whom reading was an unfathomable mystery, Caitlyn was now a self-assured girl who understood how printed letters represent the sounds of spoken words. She could read, if not perfectly.</p>
			<p class="indent">Caitlyn and her parents were flying to Connecticut for a scheduled return visit to my office. I couldn’t wait to see this transformation. Rather than a sad, slouching Caitlyn, a spirited, smiling young girl literally leaped into my office, wasting no time to show off her new skills. She came prepared, quickly reaching into her backpack and holding up two books along with a pad of paper and a pencil. Caitlyn was justly proud of her gains. She had overcome her old nemesis—reading and pronouncing words she had never before encountered. She confidently pronounced one word after another, even difficult words. <i>“Sk, sk-oo-oo-l, school,”</i> she sounded out. “Oh,” she said, “I can spell it, too. Wanna see?” Then, reaching for her pad and pencil, very carefully and with great determination, she wrote <i>s-c-h-o-o-l</i> in large, bold letters. Finally she reached into her backpack, pulled out the second book, and proceeded to read with great pride and concentration:</p>
			<p class="poetry1 stanza"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_9" title="9"/><i>In the great green room</i></p>
			<p class="poetry1"><i>there was a telephone</i></p>
			<p class="poetry1"><i>and a red balloon</i></p>
			<p class="poetry1"><i>and a picture of</i></p>
			<p class="poetry1"><i>the cow jumping over the moon</i></p>
			<p class="indent spaceabove">I was impressed by Caitlyn’s progress, but I was also struck by the dramatic turnaround her mother had made. I strongly believe that behind the success of every disabled child is a passionately committed, intensely engaged, and totally empowered parent. Esther was a changed person. She was smiling and self-assertive. She was at ease and communicated a sense of quiet but sizable confidence. As she told me:</p>
			<blockquote class="offset">
				<p>Now I am in charge of my daughter’s destiny. I never again have to just stand there and wait for her school principal to determine my daughter’s future. Now that I know, now that I understand, I never have to be at that man’s mercy again. I understand her problem, I know what she needs, and I now have the power—irrespective of anyone—to act in my daughter’s best interests. I feel so in control. I am a different person. To be freed of this absolute dependence on others for your child’s entire future is the most exhilarating feeling imaginable. Last year I just didn’t know what she needed. Now I know what to ask for her. I am no longer in the dark.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="indent">Esther was an easygoing, soft-spoken mother of four who had become a tiger, a power to be reckoned with when it came to protecting and ensuring Caitlyn’s future.</p>
			<hr class="transition"/>
			<div aria-hidden="true" class="transition">—</div>
			<p>Reading is often the key to realizing a parent’s dreams for his or her child. Early on, children are tracked, and their futures are often laid out within the school setting. In the classroom, reading is king, essential for academic success. Reading problems have consequences all across development, including into adult life. This is why it is so important to be able to identify dyslexia accurately and precisely early on and take the appropriate steps without delay to ensure that the child learns both to read and to enjoy reading.</p>
			<p class="indent">Most children who might not have been able to learn to read or to read well just a few years ago can now become competent readers. There may be a <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_10" title="10"/>very small group of children for whom reading will continue to be extremely difficult, but even these boys and girls can benefit from the application of the remarkable advances in our understanding of the reading process.</p>
			<p class="indent">Reading, as I’ve said and as I will explain later, is not a natural or instinctive process. It is acquired; it must be taught. How reading is taught can dramatically affect the ease with which a child learns to transform what are essentially abstract squiggles on a page into meaningful letters and then sounds and then words and then entire sentences and paragraphs. Reading represents a code—specifically, an alphabetic code. About 70 to 80 percent of children are able to break the code after a year of instruction in school, almost irrespective of the particular method of instruction used to teach reading. However, for the rest, reading remains beyond their reach after one, two, or even more years of schooling. Now we have the key to unlocking the reading code for these children as well.</p>
			<p class="indent">What is so exciting about our new level of understanding of dyslexia is that it explains reading and reading difficulties at all ages and at all levels of education. By identifying the primary or core cognitive weakness responsible for dyslexia, scientists now understand how children acquire the ability to read and why some do not. The model of dyslexia that has emerged can be applied to understanding (and treating) reading difficulties in children just entering school, in children enrolled in primary and middle grades, and in young adults attending high school, college, or even graduate or professional school. The model has relevance, too, for the legions of adults who go through life without the ability to enjoy reading. These frequently neglected men and women can also benefit from our new understanding of reading. No matter who the child or adult is, what his background is, what kind of home he comes from, or what his intelligence level is, all the possible influences that may affect his ability to read are routed through the same pathway deep within the brain. This pathway has been identified. In practical terms this means we know what <i>functional</i> system in the brain is involved. Furthermore, we have now pinpointed its exact <i>neuroanatomic location.</i> Even more, we now know that dyslexia impacts reading very early on. As a result of these discoveries, it is now possible: (1) to screen for and to identify with an extremely high degree of precision the children who are at highest risk for dyslexia—even in kindergarten, before they develop reading problems; (2) to diagnose dyslexia accurately in children, young adults, and adults; and (3) to manage the disorder with highly effective evidence-based treatment programs.</p>
			<p class="indent"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_11" title="11"/>While some cases are recognized when the child can’t learn to read, perhaps in the first or second grade, currently the majority of cases of dyslexia are not identified until at least third grade. In fact, it is not unusual for cases of dyslexia to go unrecognized until adolescence or adulthood. So I will address the following questions as well: How do you go about identifying a reading problem in high school or beyond? Equally important, what do you do about it? Should an older student be offered special accommodations in school and for examinations, and if so, why? What is the best school setting for a dyslexic child?</p>
			<p class="indent">According to one father who contacted me, this kind of information “saved” his son. He wrote:</p>
			<blockquote class="offset">
				<p>You saw my son Michael when he was a sophomore in high school and doing very poorly. Michael has turned around academically and emotionally. He is now a confident and secure young man. He has become his own best advocate. He knows what he needs and why. This allows him to speak up for himself and run his own interference. It is Michael who speaks to his teachers and they respect him for it. This sense of autonomy has rescued my son.</p>
				<p class="indent">P.S. This summer we are going to visit colleges.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="indent">It is never too late. The new knowledge is so basic and fundamental it is applicable to people across the entire lifespan, from the smallest of children to their grandparents. Take Rachel, a highly successful, self-made businesswoman, owner of a flourishing kennel and pet grooming business, who was unable to read beyond a fourth-grade level.</p>
			<blockquote class="offset">
				<p>
					It’s so embarrassing. Salespeople come around and leave brochures for me. How can I tell them I can’t read? Going into a restaurant, I can’t read the menu, so I’m always reduced to saying, “Hey, what’s your special for the day?” During our Passover seders, I simply want to die when it’s my turn to read. Now one of my sisters comes to my rescue and begins to read my passage. But in spite of her good intentions, there is always someone new and well-meaning at the table who says, “Oh, didn’t we just skip Rachel? Shouldn’t she have a turn, too?” By now I have memorized a lot of sight words, but show me a new word and it could just as well be Greek. Can you believe I was so desperate to read, I even ordered a reading <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_12" title="12"/>program advertised on television? Here was a program for six- and seven-year-olds and I bought it, but the sad part was that even this program didn’t help me.</p>
				<p class="indent">Now that I’m married and looking forward to having children, I want to be a reader. I want to do the normal everyday things everyone else does: read the newspaper, read a recipe, read the instructions on a bottle of medicine.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="indent">Rachel began an intensive new program for adults with dyslexia. When I recently saw her, she reported:</p>
			<blockquote class="offset">
				<p>I am going to have a baby. Each day when I get up in the morning, I open my pregnancy book and read about how my baby is growing. And when Joy is born, I am going to be able to read to her, too. It feels so good. I can read!</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="indent">Caitlyn, Michael, Rachel, and their families experienced the new sense of hope that I want to share with you. I want to take you into my laboratory and show you a revolutionary new kind of science—our new ability to watch the brain at work: thinking, speaking, reading, and remembering.</p>
			<p class="indent">In the pages that follow I will examine both the science and the human side of dyslexia. In Part I, I want to make clear what dyslexia is and how it evolves over time. I want to explain the cognitive basis for dyslexia and then what the newest brain research is teaching us about the neurobiology of dyslexia and reading. I want to share with you the substantial progress in identifying the underlying neural mechanisms responsible for reading and for dyslexia. These studies address the most fundamental questions of all, the most abstract and yet most compelling challenge facing researchers: How does the mind work, and what is the relationship between brain and behavior, between thinking and reading, and between brain structure and function?</p>
			<p class="indent">Parts II through VI take what we have learned in the laboratory and apply it not only to the classroom, across development from primary school through college, but also to the child’s life and future. I will talk about the impact of science on how we approach, diagnose, and treat children and adults with dyslexia. To ensure that this knowledge is used wisely, I will also discuss practical issues of special concern to many of you, including early diagnosis as well as diagnosis in older children and adults; special considerations <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_13" title="13"/>in the diagnosis of bright young adults; the most effective treatment for children, young adults, and adults; the relation between dyslexia and standardized tests; the relation between dyslexia, anxiety, and attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder (ADHD); accommodations for older children; and what dyslexia does and does not mean in terms of choosing a school, a college, and a career. We will begin by examining how the disorder was discovered more than a century ago.</p>
			<div class="footnote">
				<p class="footnote" epub:type="footnote" id="c01-ftn-1" role="doc-footnote"><a href="#c01-ftn1">*</a> Throughout this book I have changed the names and some identifying characteristics of many individuals in order to maintain their confidentiality. All those who are well known to the public are identified by their real names.</p>
			</div>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>