<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Permissions Acknowledgments, Overcoming Dyslexia</title>
		<link href="../css/prhStyle.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/prhStyle-media-queries.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/9780307558893_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<meta charset="utf-8"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:d230f54c-5167-4f8b-bb76-7426d9045212" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
	</head>
	<body>
		<div class="page_top_padding" id="bm1">
			<h1 class="bm_title1"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_569" title="569"/><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_570" title="570"/><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_571" title="571"/><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_572" title="572"/><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_573" title="573"/><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_574" title="574"/><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_575" title="575"/><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_576" title="576"/><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_577" title="577"/><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_578" title="578"/><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_579" title="579"/><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_580" title="580"/><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_581" title="581"/><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_582" title="582"/><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_583" title="583"/><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_584" title="584"/><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_585" title="585"/><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_586" title="586"/><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_587" title="587"/><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_588" title="588"/><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_589" title="589"/><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_590" title="590"/><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_591" title="591"/><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_592" title="592"/><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_593" title="593"/><b>PERMISSIONS ACKNOWLEDGMENTS</b></h1>
			<p class="hanging0"><i>American Federation of Teachers:</i> Excerpts from “Catch Them Before They Fall” by Joseph Torgesen from <i>American Educator</i> (Spring/Summer 1998). Reprinted by permission of the American Federation of Teachers.</p>
			<p class="hanging0"><i>American Medical Associate:</i> Excerpts from <i>JAMA</i> (278; 1196). Copyright © 1997 by the American Medical Association. Reprinted by permission of the American Medical Association.</p>
			<p class="hanging0"><i>Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.:</i> Excerpt from <i>Federation Proceedings</i> by Louis Sokoloff. Reprinted by permission of the Copyright Clearance Center, Inc.</p>
			<p class="hanging0"><i>Erlbaum Publishers:</i> Excerpt from “Outcomes of Adults with Childhood Histories of Dyslexia” by Maggie Bruck, from <i>Reading and Spelling: Development and Disorders,</i> edited by C. Hulme and R. M. Joshi. Reprinted by permission of Erlbaum Publishers.</p>
			<p class="hanging0"><i>HarperCollins Publishers:</i> Excerpts from <i>Goodnight Moon</i> by Margaret Wise Brown. Copyright © 1947 by Harper &amp; Row, Publishers, Incorporated. Text copyright renewed 1975 by Roberta Brown Rauch. Reprinted by permission of HarperCollins Publishers.</p>
			<p class="hanging0"><i>Houghton Mifflin Company:</i> “The 150 Most Frequent Words” from <i>American Heritage Word Frequency Book.</i> Copyright © 1971 by Houghton Mifflin Company. Reprinted by permission of Houghton Mifflin Company.</p>
			<p class="hanging0"><i>Hyperion Books for Children:</i> Excerpt from <i>Chugga-Chugga Choo-Choo</i> by Kevin Lewis. Copyright © 1999 by Kevin Lewis. Illustrations copyright © 1999 by Daniel Kirk. Reprinted by permission of Hyperion Books for Children.</p>
			<p class="hanging0"><i>The New York Times Company:</i> Excerpts from “On the Bench, With Fairness and Empathy” (<i>The New York Times,</i> May 27, 2009). Copyright © 2009 The New York Times Company. All rights reserved. Used under license.</p>
			<p class="hanging0"><i>Random House Children’s Books and International Creative Management, Inc.:</i> Excerpts from <i>One Fish Two Fish Red Fish Blue Fish</i> by Dr. Seuss. <sup>®</sup> &amp; Copyright © by Dr. Seuss Enterprises, L. P. 1960, renewed 1988. Reprinted by permission of Random House Children’s Books, a division of Random House, Inc., and International Creative Management, Inc. on behalf of Dr. Seuss Enterprises, L. P.</p>
			<p class="hanging0"><i>Viking Penguin:</i> Excerpts from <i>Madeline</i> by Ludwig Bemelmans. Copyright © 1939 by Ludwig Bemelmans, renewed © 1967 by Madeleine Bemelmans and Barbara Bemelmans Marciano. Excerpts from <i>The Story About Ping</i> by Marjorie Flack, illustrated by Kurt Wiese. Copyright © 1933 by Marjorie Flack and Kurt Wiese, renewed © 1961 by Hilma L. Barnum and Kurt Wiese. All rights reserved. Reprinted by permission of Viking Penguin, an imprint of Penguin Putnam Books for Young Readers, a division of Penguin Putnam Inc.</p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>