<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Continued, Overcoming Dyslexia</title>
		<link href="../css/prhStyle.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/prhStyle-media-queries.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/9780307558893_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<meta charset="utf-8"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:d230f54c-5167-4f8b-bb76-7426d9045212" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
	</head>
	<body>
		<div class="page_top_padding" id="ack">
			<p class="center"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_i" title="i"/><i>Praise for</i></p>
			<h1 class="praise_title"><b>OVERCOMING DYSLEXIA</b></h1>
			<h1 class="praise_title1"><b>1ST EDITION</b></h1>
			<p>“In this gem of a book, Dr. Sally Shaywitz uses her voice, her images, her brain—and yes, her heart—to shine a piercing and clarifying light on what we so inadequately call ‘dyslexia.’ What is more, she shows how almost everyone can overcome it.”</p>
			<p class="right">—Daniel D. Federman, M.D.</p>
			<p class="spaceabove">“Sally Shaywitz, one of America’s premier pediatricians and experts on reading, has written the definitive book on dyslexia. It is informative, user-friendly, and scientifically sound. Every family who has a child with a reading problem should have <i>Overcoming Dyslexia</i>.”</p>
			<p class="right">—Harold S. Koplewicz, M.D., director, NYU Langone Child Study Center</p>
			<p class="spaceabove">“Dr. Sally Shaywitz is one of a group of scientists who has made tremendous progress in understanding the disorder.”</p>
			<p class="right">—<i>Boston Globe Magazine</i></p>
			<p class="spaceabove">“A book parents and teachers will turn to for answers, for understanding, and for help. Many parents will recognize their children or themselves in this book and know that they are not alone, that they have enormous capabilities, and that there is real hope for improving their lives. <i>Overcoming Dyslexia</i> is the book we have all been waiting for.”</p>
			<p class="right">—Charles R. Schwab</p>
			<p class="spaceabove">“Sally Shaywitz’s book is the bible for the dyslexic world. It’s one part brainpower, two parts motivation, and three parts common sense. It all adds up to empowerment, which enables me, as a mother, to change my son’s life.”</p>
			<p class="right">—Barbara Corcoran, founder of The Corcoran Group and author of <i>Use What You’ve Got &amp; Other Business Lessons I Learned from My Mom</i></p>
			<p class="spaceabove">“A wonderful combination of science and humanism. I initially consulted Dr. Shaywitz’s book with some research questions but continued reading out of sheer fascination.”</p>
			<p class="right">—Curtis Hanson, director of <i>In Her Shoes</i> and <i>L.A. Confidential</i></p>
			<p class="spaceabove"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_ii" title="ii"/>“Shaywitz’s groundbreaking work builds an important bridge from the laboratory to the home and classroom.”</p>
			<p class="right">—<i>Publishers Weekly</i> (starred review)</p>
			<p class="spaceabove">“A superb book.”</p>
			<p class="right">—<i>Family Circle</i></p>
			<p class="spaceabove">“Highly accessible…. Parents and teachers will appreciate this tremendously helpful resource.”</p>
			<p class="right">—<i>Booklist</i></p>
			<p class="spaceabove">“A fine, nontechnical, practical resource for parents, educators, and others who confront dyslexia…. If dyslexia is a negative part of your life, get Shaywitz’s book and follow her positive advice.”</p>
			<p class="right">—Brain Connection</p>
			<p class="spaceabove">“Remarkable…. Shaywitz provides a state-of-the-art tool kit for the parents and teachers of dyslexic children. No one understands dyslexia better or explains it more clearly…. A must-read for any parent or teacher of a struggling reader.”</p>
			<p class="right">—Stephen J. Cannell, author of <i>Hollywood Tough</i></p>
			<p class="spaceabove">“One of Sally Shaywitz’s great gifts is her ability to present complex information clearly and simply for a lay audience…. In <i>Overcoming Dyslexia,</i> Dr. Shaywitz has made another important contribution by presenting the science of dyslexia so that it can be understood by those most affected.”</p>
			<p class="right">—Nina Goodman and Joanna Uhry, professors, Graduate School of Education, Fordham University</p>
			<p class="spaceabove">“Among teachers, school administrators, and parents who struggle to help children with dyslexia to become successful readers, Sally Shaywitz is something of a household name…. In <i>Overcoming Dyslexia,</i> she provides a comprehensive source of information and guidance…enlivened with personal stories from [her] work.”</p>
			<p class="right"><i>—Cerebrum,</i> the quarterly journal of the Dana Foundation</p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>