<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Copyright, Overcoming Dyslexia</title>
		<link href="../css/prhStyle.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/prhStyle-media-queries.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/9780307558893_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<meta charset="utf-8"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:d230f54c-5167-4f8b-bb76-7426d9045212" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="copyright-page">
		<div class="page_top_padding" id="cop">
			<p class="crt"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_vi" title="vi"/>SECOND VINTAGE BOOKS EDITION, MARCH 2020</p>
			<p class="crt spaceabove"><i>Copyright © 2020 by Sally Shaywitz, M.D.</i></p>
			<p class="crt spaceabove">All rights reserved. Published in the United States by Vintage Books, a division of Penguin Random House LLC, New York, and simultaneously published in Canada by Penguin Random House Canada Limited, Toronto. Originally published in hardcover in the United States by Alfred A. Knopf, a division of Penguin Random House LLC, New York, in 2003.</p>
			<p class="crt spaceabove">Vintage and colophon are registered trademarks of Penguin Random House LLC.</p>
			<p class="crt spaceabove"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_bm1_r1.xhtml#page_593">This page</a> constitute an extension of this copyright page.</p>
			<p class="crt spaceabove">The Library of Congress has cataloged the Knopf edition as follows:</p>
			<p class="crt">Name: Shaywitz, Sally E.</p>
			<p class="crt">Title: Overcoming dyslexia : completely revised and updated / Sally Shaywitz, M.D., and Jonathan Shaywitz, M.D.</p>
			<p class="crt">Description: Second Edition. | New York : Alfred A. Knopf; 2020. | First edition published in 2003. | Includes bibliographical references and index.</p>
			<p class="crt">Identifiers: LCCN 2019028000 (print) | LCCN 2019028001 (ebook)</p>
			<p class="crt">Subjects: LCSH: Reading disability. | Dyslexia. | Reading—Remedial teaching. | Dyslexic children—Education.</p>
			<p class="crt">Classification: LCC LB1050.5 (ebook) | LCC LB1050.5 .S42 2020 (print) | DDC 371.91/44—dc23</p>
			<p class="crt">LC record available at <a href="https://lccn.loc.gov/2019028000">https://lccn.loc.gov/2019028000</a></p>
			<p class="crt spaceabove"><b>Vintage Books Trade Paperback ISBN 9780679781592</b></p>
			<p class="crt"><b>Ebook ISBN 9780307558893</b></p>
			<p class="crt spaceabove"><i>Authors photograph © Jesse Stone</i></p>
			
			<p class="crt spaceabove"><a href="http://www.vintagebooks.com">www.vintagebooks.com</a></p>
			<p class="crt spaceabove conversion_code_spec">v5.4</p>
			<p class="crt conversion_code_partner">a</p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>