<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>25: Dr. Laura Cassidy and the Louisiana Key Academy, Overcoming Dyslexia</title>
		<link href="../css/prhStyle.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/prhStyle-media-queries.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/9780307558893_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<meta charset="utf-8"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:d230f54c-5167-4f8b-bb76-7426d9045212" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
	</head>
	<body>
		<div class="page_top_padding" id="c25">
			<h1 class="chap_number"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_347" title="347"/><b>25</b></h1>
			<p class="line"> </p>
			<h1 class="chap_title"><b>DR. LAURA CASSIDY AND THE LOUISIANA KEY ACADEMY</b></h1>
			<p>Your daughter is diagnosed as dyslexic. You are intelligent, caring, and knowledgeable and have reasonable resources. Your daughter fails first grade. What do you do? You investigate to find a good fit for your child so that she will learn to read, enjoy learning, and have fun. That was the situation facing Bill and Laura Cassidy, two physicians in Baton Rouge, Louisiana, regarding their daughter, Kate. At that time Dr. Bill Cassidy was also Congressman Cassidy, serving in the U.S. House of Representatives (today he is Senator Cassidy). The Cassidys are good friends of mine. We first met when Bennett and I were invited to speak at the Congressional Wives Club in 2006. There we shared the exciting twenty-first-century advances in the science of dyslexia, and a light went on for Dr. Laura Cassidy.</p>
			<blockquote class="offset">
				<p>The science made so much sense, yet it wasn’t being acted on in schools. I knew there were dyslexic kids like Kate struggling in public schools, not identified, not being given what they needed. I just had it in my mind that my experience with Kate should be able to offer other dyslexic kids some help. And really that’s what led to the Louisiana Key Academy.</p>
				<p class="indent">I started at the Department of Education, speaking to the people <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_348" title="348"/>in charge of literacy. I learned that there was not a real division for dyslexia; it was more literacy, with dyslexia underneath that. I didn’t really see anything specific being done for dyslexia, and I was opposed to the notion that you would delay identifying children until third grade. I decided to start a charter school specialized for dyslexia.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="indent">Let me further introduce you to Laura Cassidy, M.D., the founder of LKA. Dr. Cassidy is a general surgeon specializing in breast cancer. Although she had never started a school before, Dr. Cassidy’s call to action was the knowledge that dyslexia existed but that none of the nearby schools were recognizing or addressing it. Starting the school was an involved process. In addition to obtaining state permission for the charter, there was a need to find trained teachers, a location, a building, and funding. Dr. Cassidy attributes much of the success of establishing the school to increasing awareness of dyslexia and getting more people involved. Her belief is that the more people hear about it, the more parents of dyslexic children or people who understand the issues will come to the fore. For example, many classroom teachers know that these children’s needs are not being addressed. They want to help; they just don’t know how to do so.</p>
			<p class="indent">The school opened in August 2013. It started small, with only kindergarten and first and second grades. Reflecting the lack of early screening and identification of dyslexic children, the kindergarten enrolled only seven children. Dr. Cassidy found the second grade easiest to fill because there were lots of kids, like her daughter, who had failed reading in the first grade or who had struggled to read in the first grade. Overall, the school’s total enrollment was less than one hundred boys and girls.</p>
			<p class="indent">The children attending LKA come from diverse backgrounds. There are students from disadvantaged families and from middle-class families, both African American and white children. How much money a family has doesn’t matter, because it’s a free public charter school. Attending LKA is a relief for these dyslexic children. Whether it’s reading aloud in front of the classroom or trying to retrieve a spoken word, dyslexic children have anxiety. When they were at other schools, most of the children were made fun of, or they knew they were different from the other kids. Attending LKA gives these children breathing room, where they find other children like themselves. There’s no sense of shame, no sense of being different from the other children. Children at LKA are less anxious, reflecting feelings such as “I’m here, <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_349" title="349"/>and I’m getting what I need to read, and there are a lot of smart kids like me here.”</p>
			<p class="indent">Says Dr. Cassidy:</p>
			<blockquote class="offset">
				<p>A great many of our students didn’t want to go to their prior school, where they were bullied or made fun of, or even didn’t want to go to school at all anymore. Here at LKA it’s still school, so I’m sure there are some days they don’t want to go, but for the most part, I think our kids know the teachers love them and they’re here to help them succeed. They know that, and that changes a child’s attitude about going to school. The most important thing for teachers to understand is that these children are bright, despite the obstacles they face with language, whether it’s reading, spelling, or at times writing. We focus on Dr. Shaywitz’s Sea of Strengths model. While you’re helping them on this journey, you target their reading difficulty and also work to build up their sea of strengths in thinking, reasoning, and problem-solving. If you don’t get a child until third or fourth grade, their self-esteem has suffered as well, so you’re dealing not only with the academic component but the emotional component as well. Almost all the kids at LKA have previously either failed a grade, failed a course, or repeated a grade, and they’re still reading on a kindergarten or first-grade level. That’s significant emotional and academic damage to the child and his or her parents.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="indent">Striking and very impressive is the degree of integration of how concepts and new words are taught, so that words the child hears in science and social studies are familiar, having already been introduced in his language arts program. Critical to this integration, the teachers are in communication with each other; there’s a leadership team. Every child has his or her own plan, and that plan can be changed weekly.</p>
			<p class="indent">Reading is the fundamental subject, so at LKA there are small group sizes. Classes consist of either seventeen or twelve students, with these groups broken up further as well. As LKA has grown, classes of twelve are further divided into two groups of six. Currently the teacher ratio is nine to one, or six to one for the kids who need the most intervention. As the students get older they don’t need such intense intervention, but they all get ninety minutes of structured language arts <i>every day</i>—not three times a week, but <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_350" title="350"/>every day. Those who need it get additional time as well. Other subjects, such as science and social studies, are integrated with what’s going on in the reading class. It’s important that the curriculum is delivered at the child’s reading level. The child may be in the third grade, but if he is reading at a first-grade level, then that’s the level at which he has to be taught.</p>
			<p class="indent">Dr. Cassidy emphasizes that her approach has evolved over the years from the time the school was just a sparkle in her eyes.</p>
			<blockquote class="offset">
				<p>When we first started, the focus was almost entirely on decoding single words, primarily I think because I (and the teachers) like to see the phonemic deficit addressed, and that’s done through decoding. And it is very important. At the same time, as I’ve learned from Dr. Shaywitz’s teleconferences with LKA, we’ve got to start introducing the appropriate connected text as well and to do so very early on. I certainly didn’t know that at the beginning, but I do now. So when we started there was a fear of connected text. Today our students are building strong vocabularies and expanding their worldly knowledge through the introduction of reading little stories very early on.</p>
				<p class="indent">In prioritizing the importance of children being fluent readers, we first focus on teaching the children the basics of decoding. There is a lot of competition for the discrete amount of time you have in a classroom, and we have to make sure that we allocate a lot of time to working to get the children toward fluency.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="indent">Dr. Cassidy is concerned about how very many dyslexic children across the nation go unnoticed, undiagnosed, and unremediated. Dyslexics are spread throughout every school and every classroom. As is far too often the case, the teacher has twenty-seven to thirty-two and sometimes even more students in a class, and there is pressure to keep the curriculum moving. The end result is that no one identifies the dyslexic child. Dyslexia comes to light only when those children are all in one classroom in one school, like LKA. Then it’s dramatic, and dyslexia becomes the central focus.</p>
			<p class="indent">Sadly, in the typical classroom, dyslexic boys and girls remain undiagnosed and on the periphery of their teacher’s concern. As a result, much damage is being done to wonderful, bright children who are struggling to read and going unidentified. Parents are told something meaningless, such as “It’s developmental,” and to wait and wait and wait some more. So you <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_351" title="351"/>can see how welcome a school like LKA is. It started in 2013 with a small group of second-graders and progressively added a grade each year, so that in the 2018–19 school year, LKA enrolled 350 boys and girls in kindergarten through grade seven, and there was a waiting list. Summer 2019 saw the addition of an eighth grade and the initiation of a year-round school program at LKA.</p>
			<p class="indent">An increasingly acknowledged problem is that children are not being identified early enough, in kindergarten, before damage begins. Here’s Dr. Cassidy’s description of what she has observed at LKA:</p>
			<blockquote class="offset">
				<p>Our smallest enrollment is in first grade, and we’re getting the largest influx in third grade. This means these children have for the most part been sitting in schools, not identified for years and not getting what they should have gotten.</p>
				<p class="indent">The schools do not have the professional manpower/womanpower or knowledge of what they need, and so you can see how it happens. The children come to us. We know they’re smart. They start to improve, but it is so slow and laborious. Everyone wants it to be faster. We want them to be faster learners, but we have to deal with reality.</p>
				<p class="indent">Dyslexic children make up 20 percent of the student population. And yet, shockingly, schools do not typically screen for dyslexia. Why? I think they’re afraid of what they would do once they find out the children are dyslexic.</p>
				<p class="indent">Personally, I think for right now, in addition to specialized independent schools, a new model—a specialized public charter like LKA—is the best solution. If you can have the flexibility and let the children get what they need, from a cost basis and an excellent delivery basis, that is the best solution.</p>
				<p class="indent">My greatest surprise in working to develop LKA has been the lack of awareness of dyslexia within the community, and along with that the pressing needs of boys and girls who are dyslexic. Reflecting dyslexia’s paradoxical nature, the children seem typical in every <i>visible</i> manner—they are cute, sweet, and often highly intelligent—so they go unnoticed as you meet them in the playground, on the street, visiting a friend. However, their frustrating struggles trying to pronounce a word correctly, spell, retrieve a word they are trying to say, learn a foreign language—these fill up <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_352" title="352"/>most of the space at home, where increasingly distraught parents try to find an answer or at least a school, a class, or a teacher who knows what is going on within their child and who offers a plausible and effective solution. LKA offers such a solution, as evidenced by its strong embrace by parents and students.</p>
				<p class="indent">We have close to four hundred children whose parents decided it was a good thing to send them here, and most of our children stay. There are countless testimonies of the parents telling us that their child attending LKA has made a tremendous change in their family and in their child’s life because of the boost in their child’s self-esteem and the knowledge that there are other children like them. Of course, they also actually start to read as well.</p>
				<p class="indent">The teachers are totally invested; they have stayed with us and do a really good job. I see that they really enjoy it. They are invested in the child’s life, not just one score or one week. They see the big picture. They see the potential in the child’s life and not just some moments in time on a score or a grade or a class. I know they’re taught to look at these things, but these teachers actually see the potential in these children. Part of it is the professional development they receive; part of it is what you learn just from teaching a lot of children with dyslexia from year to year.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="indent">This statement rang a bell for me. As physicians we learn some from courses and books, but we learn the most from taking care of patients over time.</p>
			<blockquote class="offset">
				<p>One little child in particular came in who couldn’t read. Today he is a remarkable, profoundly changed child. He was smart and incredibly creative but wasn’t able to communicate well, which he can now do with both his teachers and his peers. And he is able to read. So the hope of his parents is now dramatically increased, as is the child’s self-esteem. Basically, he is no longer isolated. He’s able to socially interact and have friends, which he was not able to do before. What encourages me the most is that we’ve changed this child’s life just about 180 degrees. What concerns me is there are many more like him who remain unidentified and don’t learn to read, and whose self-esteem is under constant attack.</p>
				<p class="indent">The children begin the day with structured language arts for <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_353" title="353"/>ninety minutes, and the average is six children to one teacher. That’s where the children are working on the decoding and some oral reading for fluency. An important change has been that we realized that unless we scheduled time specifically for children to read connected text, there often wasn’t time enough in the period for this.</p>
				<p class="indent">We have computers, we have the computer lab. Our students are learning the keyboard. If they have difficulty with handwriting, we encourage keyboarding. They practice in their classroom, but we don’t pull them out for therapy aimed at improving their handwriting. We try to keep the children in their classroom, where the appropriate educational method is delivered.</p>
				<p class="indent">What is so important to the success of LKA is that all the teachers, our accountant, people at our front desk, they all respect and understand that these children have dyslexia and that they’re bright. They just have to be taught in a way that recognizes the child’s dyslexia. Our job is to figure out what it is a child needs to learn to be successful in life.</p>
				<p class="indent">Our graduates are going to be able to read close to grade level, if not at grade level. We don’t want them to go through life having someone need to read a sign to them, someone to give them an audio device, or for them to feel like they are not valid people because they have dyslexia. The goal would be for a child who leaves LKA to be a fluent reader, to be proud of who he is as a person and as a dyslexic, and to be able to advocate for himself and to live a fulfilling life. I feel like that’s what we give them. We’re giving them the tools and helping the parents have the tools.</p>
				<p class="indent">I think most children with dyslexia know they’re different. At LKA they know they are not alone but a member of a community of many children. Our children are so diverse in their economic background, their gender, their race, and geography as well. It’s like we’re a microcosm of the world, which is great.</p>
				<p class="indent">We now offer art in a newly added specialized room. The children are very creative and love art because it gives them a way to express themselves without having to use language. There are also opportunities for the children to express themselves verbally—for example, in activities in our new drama room. Our goal for next year is to have a sports team: soccer. Of course, they have PE.</p>
				<p class="indent"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_354" title="354"/>Right now the children are all excited about providing nominations and names for a school mascot. Our school community also boasts of an active student council, where we’ve had some of the older kids who when they came to LKA were struggling academically and shy, who now have chosen to run for office. They fully engage in the election process, posting their picture and giving a little speech.</p>
				<p class="indent">Basically, our kids are just normal, regular kids, and when they are in a safe environment with people who care about them and see their potential, they know that. Kids are incredible. Whether it’s their parents or their teachers, they know they’re judged. And if they’re judged as having potential and value, they are going to be okay. They may struggle on a test or not make an A, but that’s not really what’s most valuable for them to get out of school. It’s to have the self-awareness that you can go on to contribute to society. That’s what our students get.</p>
				<p class="indent">We hear all the time, “My child no longer hates going to school.” We don’t give homework that would cause a struggle or confrontation between the parent and the child at home. There may be repetition of what you learned in school, but it won’t be laborious homework that involves reading new material or learning spelling or writing a three-paragraph essay that they’re not ready to do. They will learn this at LKA but not be forced to do so at home.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="indent">Dr. Cassidy has strong feelings about the tendency in many schools to avoid using the word <i>dyslexia</i> and instead to use nonspecific, vague, ill-defined, relatively meaningless terms such as <i>learning differences.</i> She emphasizes that dyslexia is a discrete, scientifically well defined entity, and that use of the word <i>dyslexia</i> conveys much important information about the child.</p>
			<p class="indent">Laura Cassidy’s ultimate goal is for LKA to be a school from first through eighth grade in which children are fluent readers by the time they leave. She extends her vision to helping the children transition to high school through LKA’s Dyslexia Resource Center, so if her LKA graduates are struggling in high school, the LKA Resource Center is there to help the schools better understand dyslexia and provide continuing accommodations and remediation. This will have an added benefit of providing professional development for the teachers in the high schools serving the LKA graduates as well as other dyslexic students in these schools who have not had the benefit of first attending LKA. Recognizing that so many teachers in other schools <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_355" title="355"/>have little knowledge of dyslexia, the LKA Resource Center offers postgraduate experience and courses about dyslexia to more widely disseminate twenty-first-century knowledge of dyslexia.</p>
			<blockquote class="offset">
				<p>Many parents have told us that their children now want to come to school. They will read at home in front of their parents or siblings, which is a huge thing for these children. They participate in plays or other public events, and that’s changed their self-esteem. I think the greatest testimony to our school, though, is that unless the parents are moving, all the students are coming back. It would be even better if more children were coming in earlier, in first grade, and some of those children could then leave even sooner.</p>
				<p class="indent">In transitioning from LKA, two things need to be in place. One, the child needs to be fluent or as close to grade-level fluency as possible. Two, when the student transfers, it has to be to a school that keeps the child moving forward and understands what dyslexia is, so that the parent is not having to continuously fight for his or her child to receive what that child needs. If the child doesn’t get what she needs and then regresses, not only academically but also in self-esteem, that would be tragic.</p>
				<p class="indent">Right now, in truth, there are not too many high schools that understand dyslexia. We are having more acceptance in the community, and while we are not there just yet, I think that as we grow and as the children get older, we will get there. I am hoping through combined education and outreach people will increasingly understand.</p>
				<p class="indent">We are, happily, making progress in having schools understand the key need to screen for and identify at-risk boys and girls early—in kindergarten or first grade. For example, we are working with one Catholic school that is now screening all their kindergartners and first-graders with the Shaywitz DyslexiaScreen™. We will take the ones who fall out as at-risk for dyslexia and further test each of these children. Then, for those whom we identify as dyslexic, we will talk to their parents about options, which would include attending Louisiana Key Academy as well as after-school tutoring at our LKA Resource Center. In addition, several of their teachers are going to go through teacher training starting this summer. Our goal is to equip that school so that they can take care of children with dyslexia. That’s the goal.</p>
			</blockquote>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>