<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Acknowledgments, Overcoming Dyslexia</title>
		<link href="../css/prhStyle.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/prhStyle-media-queries.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/9780307558893_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<meta charset="utf-8"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:d230f54c-5167-4f8b-bb76-7426d9045212" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
	</head>
	<body>
		<div class="page_top_padding" id="ack">
			<h1 class="bm_title"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_536" title="536"/><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_537" title="537"/><b>ACKNOWLEDGMENTS</b></h1>
			<p>
				How do you best acknowledge the myriad of people whose support, work, and wise counsel have made this book what it is? I am incredibly grateful to the very many men and women who have contacted me, thanking me for the first edition of <i>Overcoming Dyslexia</i> while also sharing with me their or their children’s, or someone they care deeply about’s, life as a dyslexic. The knowledge and wisdom (I hope) that this has imparted to me is immeasurable and deeply valued and appreciated. Each of these interactions and all of them together have given me insight and more: hope that there is a much-deserved better future ahead for all those who are dyslexic.</p>
			<p class="indent">For me, this most recent journey has taken five years. All the while I have worked, pursuing important unanswered questions concerning dyslexia and carrying out research at our Yale Center for Dyslexia &amp; Creativity (YCDC) to address each. Concurrently, following my own advice given in congressional testimony, I have worked hard—through lectures, testimonies to Congress and educating those in Congress, published papers, and our YCDC website and newsletters—to try to ensure that scientific knowledge of dyslexia is translated into action. Here I must acknowledge the thoughtful and proactive legislators who listened and took action. First and foremost is Senator Bill Cassidy (R-LA), who, as you will have read in this second <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_538" title="538"/>edition, is the father of a wonderful, bright dyslexic daughter and the spouse of Dr. Laura Cassidy, a devoted mother and the founder and leader of an extraordinary, highly effective, life-changing public charter school, LKA, in Baton Rouge, LA. To share but one example, Senator Cassidy championed the groundbreaking First Step Act, which brought to life the very first evidence-based definition of dyslexia in federal legislation while also defining the criteria for a valid dyslexia screening instrument. Senator Chris Murphy (D-CT), my extraordinary Representative Rosa DeLauro (D-CT), together with Representatives Dr. Larry Buschon (R-IN), Joe Courtney (D-CT), and Bruce Westerman (R-AR), Dutch Ruppetsberger (D-MD) and his chief of staff, Tara Oursler, and former California representative Pete Stark, provided valuable support, along with others I may have inadvertently left out. State officials have played a significant role, too. I must single out New York state assemblyman Robert Carroll and California governor Gavin Newsom, both dyslexic themselves and caring greatly about all those who are, and who have worked exceptionally hard to make scientifically based, positive policy changes that support dyslexic students.</p>
			<p class="indent">To say that I have been blessed does not do justice to the role my family and particularly my spouse of fifty-seven years and work partner of forty-seven years, Bennett, have played in my life and certainly in my pursuit of the science and heart of dyslexia.</p>
			<p class="indent">This pursuit—some refer to it as an obsession in the most positive sense of the word—has been carried out jointly with Bennett, a child neurologist, who holds the Charles and Helen Schwab Chair in Dyslexia and Learning Development at Yale. We are truly one in every sense of the word: the psychological support, the intellectual rapport and exchange of knowledge, and, most of all, sharing a love of science and an even greater passion to bring newly minted scientific knowledge to the dyslexic children and adults who can most benefit from it. We were so excited when we saw our longitudinal data validating the unexpected nature of dyslexia—that is, a person can be both dyslexic and highly intelligent. Seeing this, we have worked to ensure that all of society is aware of this relationship and are grateful that dyslexia’s critical unexpected nature is now part of the federal definition of dyslexia. Similarly, data from the Connecticut Longitudinal Study showing clearly that dyslexia impacts students as early as first grade, where a large and persistent achievement gap between typical readers and dyslexic readers is already present, drove us to action. Deeply concerned about this large early gap, we developed the evidence-based Shaywitz DyslexiaScreen™ to screen <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_539" title="539"/>and identify as early as kindergarten and first grade those young students who are at-risk for dyslexia. My gratitude goes to Tina Eichstadt and her colleagues at Pearson Publishers for making this critical instrument a practical reality. I also want to acknowledge and thank our incredible hardworking team at our Yale Center for Dyslexia &amp; Creativity—my irreplaceable longtime assistant, Carmel Lepore; Melanie Loeber; Sally Sherman; John Holahan; Reissa Michaels; Mary Losee; Christine Colonis Babinski; Rebecca Sandmann; and Nancy Pelegano—who are dedicated to making sure our clinical studies are carried out with care and a sense of urgency. I am, indeed, fortunate to have the support of Dr. Cliff Bogue, our Chair of Pediatrics, and the very able Konstantza Popova and John Palmieri in making sure our center runs so well.</p>
			<p class="indent">Much of the exciting new information in the second edition of <i>Overcoming Dyslexia</i> has come from the Connecticut Longitudinal Study. This unique study of entering kindergarteners has now continuously been followed by me and our team for over three decades. I want to thank and praise the dedicated group of colleagues who worked so hard to help decipher and make sense of the study’s data. In particular, we are extremely fortunate to work with and benefit from the expertise of our collaborators and colleagues Emilio Ferrer and Eduardo Estrada, Jim Hammitt and Daniel Herrera-Araujo, John Gore and Baxter Rogers, Catherine Lebel, John Gabrieli, Irwin Kirsch, Don Rock, Kentaro Yamamoto, Larry Weiss, Don Saklofske, Reid Lyon, and Dr. Fred Romberg. I must also note a very productive collaboration with Eli Lilly and Company, and particularly the role of Linda Wietecha. I must acknowledge scholar Cecil Reynolds who initially introduced me to and then taught me so much about education, especially RTI.</p>
			<p class="indent">Yale has been my academic home and provided comfort as well as challenges, but overall incredible support and stimulation. Yale president Peter Salovey is an extraordinary leader who provides leadership and direction in the best sense of the word: leadership that cares deeply about Yale’s students. This commitment and openness touches all Yale students and has led to Yale’s embarking on new, previously uncharted pathways based on scientific evidence, most notably in providing a partial foreign-language waiver that has been a blessing for dyslexic students. At Yale I must single out and share that there is not enough praise to do justice to Linda Lorimer, whom you will have read more about here in this book, for her dedication to and for what she has made possible for dyslexic students at our university and how she has both inspired and provided me with exceptional support to carry out new <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_540" title="540"/>ideas. I also want to extend my deep appreciation to Kate Stith, the Lafayette S. Foster Professor of Law and the former acting dean of Yale Law School, for her wisdom and guidance. She has an unusual depth of feeling that aligns so well with her brilliant mind, much to the benefit of all members of the law school and Yale community. At the same time, I must note the incredible support I have received from Sheree Carter-Galvan, former Yale attorney and now senior vice president and general counsel at the American Museum of Natural History. One can have good ideas, but you also need faculty and staff to make these a positive reality. Here at Yale it has been my pleasure, and indeed an honor, to work with Dean Mark Schenker, who chairs the Committee on Honors and Academic Standing, on ensuring that every step in the process of reviewing requests for a partial language waiver by dyslexic students is carried out in a scrupulous manner, equitably and with care, fair to all concerned. My hope is that by reading about how meaningful and successful this accommodation process has been at Yale, other universities and, yes, high schools as well will give thought to incorporating this much-needed accommodation for dyslexic students into their schools.</p>
			<p class="indent">It has been my honor and good fortune to interact with Dean Schenker and his committee and learn from each the true meaning of collegiality. In a similar vein, interacting with our Yale admissions heads, initially Jeff Brenzel and more recently Jeremiah Quinlan, has taught me much about the care and dedication that goes into the review process for each applicant. Since schools are not permitted to ask about conditions such as dyslexia, I worked with then dean Brenzel to help review applicants and educate the committee members on how some of the students’ attributes appearing on an application might misleadingly be misinterpreted as negative signs when they most likely are symptoms of dyslexia in an otherwise very bright and promising applicant. I plan to and look forward to sharing this information with ongoing committees. This experience has greatly influenced me and encouraged me to incorporate sections on high school and beyond in this edition.</p>
			<p class="indent">Not only the university but sections of our Yale Medical School have been exceptionally welcoming and eager to learn more about their students, residents, and faculty who are dyslexic. Outstanding here is the Chair of Surgery, Dr. Nita Ahuja, with whom I’ve had highly stimulating discussions leading to a session with departmental members on the science and clinical impact of dyslexia. I have learned, as I’ve discussed in this book, so much about how slow readers can be excellent, fast thinkers from my many interactions with <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_541" title="541"/>the brilliant, highly regarded dyslexic surgeons Dr. Toby Cosgrove and the late Dr. Graeme Hammond.</p>
			<p class="indent">A major question facing educators and parents concerns school—specifically, where can I send my dyslexic son or daughter to ensure understanding and addressing of his or her educational, social, and emotional needs? My frequent visits to and interactions with educators at a range of schools have been not only incredibly informative but also inspirational. I have learned so much from my direct interactions with students, parents, and educators at Park Century School, where I now sit on the board as a trustee. I am fortunate to be able to interact with, learn from, and exchange ideas with school head Judith Fuller and fellow trustees (and parents) Hilary Garland, Bess Armstrong, Jennie Burkart, Dr. Isla Garraway, Leslie Goodman, Paul Jennings, Trish Torrey, Sally Weil, and others. Visiting and interacting with school head Jay Russell, associate head Jon Rosenshine, and admissions head Maureen Sweeney only make my admiration for the Windward School and its approach to its dyslexic students grow more and more. I have been fortunate to work with, advise, and serve on the board of a very new and special school model, that of a specialized public charter school for dyslexic students, Louisiana Key Academy (LKA). Started, as I have noted, by Dr. Laura Cassidy, this school is making a huge difference, especially for disadvantaged dyslexic boys and girls, who are thriving in this environment. Dr. Cassidy, board chair at LKA, along with Kayla Reggio, director of the associated Dyslexia Resource Center, are intensely involved not only in the school but in outreach about dyslexia to the public and parochial schools in Baton Rouge and elsewhere. I also want to acknowledge Dacia Toll, co-CEO and president of Achievement First, a nonspecialized charter school network, for her desire to learn more about dyslexia and support a special project I headed designed to help teach dyslexic children to read. I have also learned much and benefited from visiting and interacting with schools in the Los Angeles Unified School District (LAUSD). In particular, I want to express my admiration for the efforts of Mary Ann Sullivan and Vy Nguyen at the LAUSD Intensive Diagnostic Educational Center, or IDEC as it is commonly referred to, in working hard to initiate forward-looking intervention programs serving a group of their dyslexic students.</p>
			<p class="indent">Both visiting and speaking at Microsoft headquarters and having unusually productive exchanges with Mike Tholfsen and, previously, Tim Hopper not only provided me with excellent information on advances in technology helpful to dyslexics but, as importantly, gave me insight into Microsoft’s <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_542" title="542"/>serious concern for and dedication to advancing the interests of all those who are dyslexic.</p>
			<p class="indent">Nate Hundt is a person whom I greatly admire and who is very special to me. I have known Nate (and his wonderful parents, Elizabeth Katz and Reed Hundt) since he was diagnosed as dyslexic as a young boy, and I got to know and admire him even more as he advanced through Yale College and then Yale School of Management. Nate is not only dyslexic but also brilliant and caring. He is now principal products manager at Workday, which provides administrative software for large organizations such as Yale. Nate invited Bennett and me to speak to senior administrators at the company, which was a powerful and enlightening experience. We chose to speak on “Dyslexia, Diversity, and Team Building—the Case for Cognitive Diversity,” which was very well received and taught us much as well. Following our formal talk, we were treated to a more informal and highly stimulating conversation with Nate, Sarah Ospina, and Greg Pryor. Sarah in particular spoke passionately and persuasively about the role of empathy in dyslexia and in team building. Our response to hearing from Sarah, Greg, and Nate has been to add empathy to the strengths represented in our Sea of Strengths model of dyslexia.</p>
			<p class="indent">Bennett and I were privileged to be invited to serve as advisors to the XPRIZE, which provided a rare inside look at how this acclaimed high-level challenge process works. Even more important, this experience introduced us to an unusually talented and dedicated leader, Shlomy Kattan, executive director at the XPRIZE Foundation. In an event organized and led by Shlomy, we had an incredibly positive experience interacting with and learning about the goal and progress of software developed for teaching adults to read using handheld devices, as noted in our adult chapter.</p>
			<p class="indent">I can write so definitively about brilliant, caring, and highly successful and resilient dyslexics because I have met and gotten to know each at a very personal level. These inspirational men and women, including David Boies, Dr. Toby Cosgrove, Ari Emanuel, and Diane Swonk, have become close friends whom I cherish. I have also been extremely fortunate to meet and get to know the highly accomplished dyslexic attorney Rebecca Aragon, the acclaimed dyslexic scientist Frank Church, and the Academy Award–winning producer Brian Grazer. Each has taught me something new about dyslexia and resilience.</p>
			<p class="indent">I must note how proud I am to have Ari Emanuel as a friend. Ari is creative and brilliant and has an incredibly large heart, which has led him to work to establish a public charter school in Los Angeles for disadvantaged boys and girls who are dyslexic. I am honored to be part of this incredible <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_543" title="543"/>endeavor, where Bennett and I are working with his very able assistant, Romola Ratnam.</p>
			<p class="indent">So many others have made a difference in their support, including Valerie Jarrett and her mom, the distinguished educator Barbara Bowman, a founder and now president of the Erikson Institute, a major leader in early childhood education. I very much enjoyed getting to know Barbara and exchanging views when we both served on the Committee on the Prevention of Reading Difficulties in Young Children. I have greatly benefited from Valerie’s generosity and commitment to helping children from the time Bennett and I discussed dyslexia with her in her office in the West Wing of the Obama White House, and later when she graciously agreed to be the introductory speaker for our 2015 Yale Conference “Dyslexia: Slow Readers, Fast Thinkers—It Takes a Dyslexic Brain.” I want to acknowledge the passionate and meaningful support of Sam Fox, Deborah Stark, and Pleasant Rowland. They care deeply about dyslexia and have made a real difference in our work.</p>
			<p class="indent">I also want to acknowledge other supporters who care and are knowledgeable about dyslexia: Eileen Marzola, Donald Takacs, Sheryl Knapp, and parent Don Vail. A warm and grateful shout-out and thank-you to my longtime dyslexia experts Helaine Schupack and Gail Hirsch. A special thank-you to Barbara Wilson, founder and developer of the Wilson Reading System, which has made and is making such a difference to students who are dyslexic.</p>
			<p class="indent">My ongoing and frequent interactions with the Lucas family—dad Dr. Tyler Lucas, who is dyslexic; brilliant daughter Skye, who is both dyslexic and a Penn student; son Hayden, who is also very bright and dyslexic; and mom, Geralyn, who is the epitome of an effective, loving, persevering champion for her dyslexic children—have been inspirational. I am so happy and fortunate to know you and to learn from you over the years what it means to grow up very bright and dyslexic and what it means to be a dyslexic child’s family.</p>
			<p class="indent">My desire to inform parents, educators, dyslexics themselves, and society as a whole about the true nature of dyslexia has been strongly advanced by <i>New York Times</i> reporter Katie Hafner, who is a superb communicator, conveying facts and feelings accurately and at the highest level. I have also been fortunate to work with CBS television producer Amiel Weisfogel on an up-to-date, unusual cover story on dyslexia on <i>CBS Sunday Morning</i> with Jane Pauley. Bennett and I were honored to be selected as the recipients of the Liberty Science Center 2019 Genius Award “in recognition of your inspiring accomplishments and your pioneering work in advancing our understanding of dyslexia.” To receive this award was wonderful and filled us with gratitude. <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_544" title="544"/>Equally inspiring and rewarding was getting to know the leaders of the Liberty Science Center, beginning with its head, Paul Hoffman, and associates Elise Nolan and Christine Arnold-Schroeder, who care deeply about dyslexia and are committed to educating society about the latest scientific knowledge.</p>
			<p class="indent">That there is a book at all and one that has connected to so many people is the singular responsibility of my patient and highly skilled editor, Jonathan Segal. How do I thank you, Jonathan, first for being the one to recognize the potential of the first edition of this book and for gently but often firmly leading me through its creation and completion? Jonathan Segal is a master editor who knows every facet of editing, most of which were and some of which may remain unknown to me. In all, the process of writing, editing, and rewriting each edition has been a long one, and I have been incredibly fortunate to have this brilliant, caring editor at my side. I owe so much for his insights, his skill, and his ability to take me along on his editing journey with this edition. Knowing him more personally now, I can share that Jonathan’s skill as an editor is equaled by his compassion as a human being. Not surprisingly, I have also benefited from the attention and support of Jonathan’s very able assistants, Sam Aber and more recently Erin Sellers, and superb production editor Victoria Pearson.</p>
			<p class="indent">The hub and indeed the heart of the work Bennett and I carry out is the Yale Center for Dyslexia &amp; Creativity. Notable accomplishments by us and in the field are reported on our website, <a href="http://dyslexia.yale.edu">dyslexia.yale.edu</a>. We have been incredibly fortunate to have the dedicated support of Kathy Crockett, Lynn Waymer, Amber Bobin, Wendy Pinto, and Barbara Pearce. More recently, Michael Mershon and his Hatcher group have ably taken on the responsibility of managing our communications, including our website.</p>
			<p class="indent">Charles Schwab has been highly supportive in meaningful ways, such as endowing the Charles and Helen Schwab Professor in Dyslexia and Learning Development, which has meant so much to Bennett and me. Schwab stands out as an inspiring example of what a dyslexic can accomplish. He also cares deeply about ensuring that dyslexia is better understood so that dyslexic students are acknowledged and supported.</p>
			<p class="indent">I am indebted to Karen Pritzker for so many meaningful contributions that it is difficult to know where to begin. First, she has endowed the Audrey G. Ratner Chair in Learning Development and Dyslexia, which I proudly hold. This has provided me with an opportunity to get to know Audrey (who is Karen’s mother) on a personal level and learn from her in so many ways. She was drawn to reading and how best to teach reading early on, and it is <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_545" title="545"/>such a pleasure to discuss this together. Audrey is also, not surprisingly, very wise, and I have gained so much from our conversations and exchanges.</p>
			<p class="indent">It is really difficult for me to do justice to what Karen Pritzker’s contributions have meant to me, scientifically, academically, and personally. Karen is an extraordinary person in every sense of the word: She is brilliant, brimming with original ideas and solutions; modest; a deeply caring mother; and she has a huge heart. I have been fortunate to be able to plan with her, bounce ideas off her, and benefit from her insights. Following a conversation with her, I typically say to myself, “Now, why didn’t I think of that?” She is a leader in thinking but never overpowering or boastful. No, she gently tries to guide you to see the light. I feel privileged to know not only Karen and her late, wonderful husband, Michael Vlock, but also her sweet, smart, and loving children as well. Having known them and cared about them since they were younger, I view them as part of my loving extended family.</p>
			<p class="indent">Earlier, when speaking about my spouse, Bennett, I mentioned that I have been blessed. Here I want to share that I indeed am blessed to have the family that I have, my husband and our three sons and their families. Having such a caring family has made all the difference to me and given me all the support, strength, and reassurance needed to carry out stressful and yet rewarding activities such as writing a book like <i>Overcoming Dyslexia.</i> They are responsible for my remaining true to my three goals in writing: to share cutting-edge scientific knowledge, to translate scientific knowledge into action, and to ensure that compassion and empathy are integral to the information I share and advice I give in this book.</p>
			<p class="indent">Family has always been my primary focus. I had three children, including a set of twins, in under three years and chose to stay at home with my kids when they were young. I loved being with them and am so grateful to see them now as caring, successful adults and fathers. Together we are a tightly connected, incredibly loving and caring family who put one another first. I note all this because this is what is responsible for any success I have had. I have a loving safety net that is always there to support and protect me. Whatever I need, they are there for me; I am fortunate because they are so bright and caring. I don’t have to ask—they are there for me, especially as physicians themselves. They are my comfort, my home editors with whom I can discuss topics and who help me decide what direction a particular discussion might take. They are my comforters, my reminders, my encouragers and are always there for me. David is consistently there, watching out for his parents and brothers and, along with his wife, Diana, makes sure his three remarkable <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_546" title="546"/>daughters always know that they are the center of their parents’ lives. Yet David, an extraordinary, knowledgeable, and caring physician-scientist, still makes time both to write incredibly thoughtful pieces synthesizing and clarifying complex issues at the cutting edge of health and technology and to create intriguing and highly stimulating, not-to-be-missed <i>Tech Tonics</i> podcasts with Lisa Suennen, all the while maintaining a very active domestic and international schedule. I am particularly honored and proud that my son Jonathan, a remarkable, incredibly knowledgeable, and deeply caring psychiatrist, has joined me to coauthor this book and share his deep expertise in areas such as anxiety and attention-deficit disorder, which are so common and so disruptive to dyslexic children and adults. Jonathan is the psychiatrist everyone wishes they had and could speak with. Jonathan is not only a superb psychiatrist, he is a wonderful dad who is always there for his sweet, smart young daughter. Adam, Jonathan’s twin, is a brilliant, dedicated physician-scientist, relentlessly exploring every possible pathway to finding cures for rare diseases affecting children. Given his unusual ability to address and truly consider each issue from multiple perspectives, both scientific and humanistic, Adam is a much-admired leader in his field. As busy as he and his wife, Marina, are, they always prioritize making time for their adorable daughter and wonderful, curious son. Adam is an incredibly caring individual, always looking after me. He is the consulting physician for everyone in our family whom we all rely on for the most thoughtful, empathetic, and truly helpful advice. What is so amazing to me and brings me so much joy is that as incredibly busy as our children are, there is always a call or an email asking how I’m doing, asking how they might help, and suggesting that I am working too hard and should take time for myself. Being surrounded by a loving and incredibly caring family is my magic charm that cheers and energizes me so that I can go forward and realize my dream.</p>
			<p class="indent">Speaking of family, I must acknowledge and pay tribute here to the unfailing devotion of my parents, Dora and Meyer Epstein, who first gave me love, strength, and compassion, and my sister, Irene, who continues to do so. She and her wonderful late husband, Marvin, nurtured me when I lost my mother and have always been there for me. Fortunately, the feeling and love between us is strong and mutual.</p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>