<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>2: The Historical Roots of Dyslexia, Overcoming Dyslexia</title>
		<link href="../css/prhStyle.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/prhStyle-media-queries.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/9780307558893_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<meta charset="utf-8"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:d230f54c-5167-4f8b-bb76-7426d9045212" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
	</head>
	<body>
		<div class="page_top_padding" id="c02">
			<h1 class="chap_number"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_14" title="14"/><b>2</b></h1>
			<p class="line"> </p>
			<h1 class="chap_title"><b>THE HISTORICAL ROOTS OF DYSLEXIA</b></h1>
			<p>In the late nineteenth century, physicians in rural Seaford, England, and in the heart of Scotland wrote in medical journals about children in their Victorian society who were bright and motivated, who came from concerned and educated families, and who had interested teachers, but who nevertheless could not learn to read. The very innocence of the descriptions and the deep perplexity expressed by the physicians offer a unique understanding of dyslexia, one that cannot be obtained by reading the current literature.</p>
			<p class="indent">On November 7, 1896, Dr. W. Pringle Morgan of Seaford wrote in the <i>British Medical Journal</i> about Percy F., fourteen years old.</p>
			<blockquote class="offset">
				<p><span id="ftn-1"/>He has always been a bright and intelligent boy, quick at games, and in no way inferior to others his age.</p>
				<p class="indent">His great difficulty has been—and is now—his inability to read.</p>
				<p class="indent">He has been at school or under tutors since he was 7 years old, and the greatest efforts have been made to teach him to read, but, in spite of this laborious and persistent training, he can only with difficulty spell out words of one syllable….</p>
				<p class="indent">I next tried his ability to read figures, and found he could do so easily. He read off quickly the following: 785, 852, 017, 20, 969, <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_15" title="15"/>and worked out correctly: (a+x) (a–x)=a<sup>2</sup>–x<sup>2</sup>…. He says he is fond of arithmetic, and finds no difficulty with it, but that printed or written words “have no meaning to him,” and my examination of him quite convinces me that he is correct in that opinion…he is what [Adolf] Kussmaul [a German neurologist] has termed “word blind.”…</p>
				<p class="indent">I might add that the boy is bright and of average intelligence in conversation. His eyes are normal…and his eyesight is good. The schoolmaster who has taught him for some years says that he would be the smartest lad in the school if the instruction were entirely oral.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="indent">Morgan captures the basic elements underlying what we refer to today as developmental dyslexia. Percy seems to have all the intellectual and sensory equipment necessary for reading, and yet he cannot read. The deficit seems only to involve reading letters and words, and Percy does quite well in math. As Morgan goes on to say, the numeral 7 is easily discerned and read, but not the written word <i>seven.</i></p>
			<p class="indent">Morgan was the first to appreciate word-blindness as a developmental disorder occurring in otherwise healthy children. However, the intriguing observation that men and women with good eyesight and strong intelligence could still lack the ability to read had been made by physicians centuries before—but always in adults who had suffered some sort of brain insult. <span id="ftn-2"/>What is perhaps the earliest recorded case of word-blindness dates back to 1676, when a German physician, Dr. Johann Schmidt, published his observations of Nicholas Cambier, a sixty-five-year-old man who lost his ability to read following a stroke. As the concept evolved, cases appearing in the medical literature described men and women like Cambier who had once read normally but then had suffered a stroke, tumor, or traumatic injury resulting in the loss of the ability to read, a condition termed <i>acquired alexia.</i> As more cases were reported, there was an increasing interest in the nature of the reading difficulty and its associated symptoms. For example, in 1872 the distinguished British neurologist Sir William Broadbent reported a case of acquired alexia, noting that his patient also suffered from a profound difficulty in naming even the most familiar objects. As the patient was brought into a London hospital, he was able to say, “I can see [the words] but cannot understand them.”</p>
			<p class="indent">Although Broadbent’s contribution was important in providing a descriptive <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_16" title="16"/>account of acquired reading difficulties, it was not until 1871 that Adolf Kussmaul came to the seminal realization that <span id="ftn-4"/>“a complete text-blindness may exist, although the power of sight, the intellect and the powers of speech are intact.” Kussmaul is credited with coining the term <i>word-blindness</i> (<i>wortblindheit</i>) for this perplexing condition. He narrowed the clinical entity of word-blindness to that of an isolated condition affecting the ability to recognize and read text but with both intelligence and expressive language intact. Kussmaul then went even further in tracing the cases to lesions in the back of the brain, around the left angular gyrus.</p>
			<p class="indent">Another German physician, Professor Rudolf Berlin, in Stuttgart, further refined our perceptions of these acquired reading problems. In his monograph <i>Eine besondre Art der Wortblindheit</i> (A Particular Kind of Word-blindness), published in 1887, Berlin describes six cases that he had personally observed over a period of twenty years. Berlin uses the term <i>dyslexia</i> to refer to what he perceives as a special form of word-blindness found in adults who lose the ability to read secondary to a specific brain lesion. If the lesion was complete, there would follow an absolute inability to read, acquired alexia. However, if the disruption was only partial, <span id="ftn-5"/>“there may be very great difficulty in interpreting written or printed symbols (dyslexia).” He conceptualizes dyslexia as a member of the larger family of language disorders called aphasia, in which there is difficulty in either understanding or producing spoken language, or both. According to Berlin, on March 4, 1863, a Herr B. complained that he had to stop work because</p>
			<blockquote class="offset">
				<p>reading of printed and written characters had become so very difficult to him…. He had exactly the same difficulty with [Jaeger] types of all sizes [types of increasing sizes used to assess visual acuity]…. There was no pain or discomfort in the eyes…the letters did not become dim or confused—he could simply not read further…. Neither the eye nor its muscular apparatus showed any abnormality on the most careful examination.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="indent">Imagine what a startling observation this must have been in mid-nineteenth-century Germany. The very idea that you could have perfect vision and yet could not <span id="ftn-3"/><i>see</i> the words on the page in order to read them—that you could see and read a numeral written in a type as small as Jaeger 1 and still not be able to read a simple word in a type as large as Jaeger 16—must have been chilling. So it is not surprising that cases of <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_17" title="17"/>word-blindness were often referred for consultation to specialists in the eye and vision—ophthalmologists. And it was a report of acquired alexia by an ophthalmologist at the Glasgow Eye Infirmary, Dr. James Hinshelwood, that served as the direct catalyst for Morgan’s subsequent paper describing congenital word-blindness.</p>
			<p class="indent">In the December 21, 1895, issue of the medical journal <i>The Lancet,</i> we can read Hinshelwood’s report of the case of a highly educated fifty-eight-year-old man, a teacher of French and German, who suddenly awoke one morning to discover that</p>
			<blockquote class="offset">
				<p><span id="ftn-6"/>he could not read the French exercise which a pupil gave him to correct. On the previous day he had read and corrected the exercises as usual. Greatly puzzled…having summoned his wife, he asked her if she could read the exercise. She read it without the slightest difficulty. He then took up a printed book to see if he could read it, and found that he could not read a single word. He remained in this condition until I saw him. On examining his visual acuity with the test types I found that he was unable to read even the largest letters of the test types. He informed me that he could see all the letters plainly and distinctly, but could not say what they were…. I found on examining further with figures that he did not experience the slightest difficulty in reading any number of figures quite fluently and without making any mistakes whatever. He could read figures printed on the same scale as Jaeger No. 1, the smallest of the test types, and from other tests it was evident that there was no lowering of his visual acuity. His inability to read was thus manifestly not due to any failure of visual power…. No other mental defect could be ascertained on the most careful examination.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="indent">It is easy to appreciate how, after reading this report, Morgan became excited when he encountered virtually the same constellation of symptoms and findings in his young patient Percy F. Although Hinshelwood’s report concerns an adult who had once been a good reader, the similarities of the reading difficulties experienced by Percy F., who had never learned to read, and Hinshelwood’s patient are impressive. Both had symptoms of word-blindness and each was unable to read words, but as Morgan and Hinshelwood emphasize, each could read figures—in the smallest of types—and <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_18" title="18"/>perform mental calculations without any hesitation. Hinshelwood’s 1895 report is important for several reasons, not the least of which is the clarity of his clinical description of acquired difficulty in reading as opposed to those problems in reading that are secondary to specific ophthalmologic impairments affecting a person’s sight or visual acuity. And, of course, it was Hinshelwood’s paper that prompted Morgan in 1896 to submit his own report of word-blindness, but in this instance of congenital origin.</p>
			<p class="indent">It is not at all surprising that, historically, cases of acquired word-blindness in adults were noted prior to cases of congenital word-blindness. Mainly this is because in acquired cases the occurrence of word-blindness is abrupt; there is a dramatic change—a sudden loss of the ability to read. Acquired word-blindness primarily affects adults and occurs secondary to a brain insult occurring during a person’s lifetime. Such insults, whether from a stroke or a tumor, typically affect the left side of the brain, where they may damage multiple brain systems. In addition to problems reading, affected patients may experience muscle weakness on the right side of the body, difficulty pronouncing words, or problems naming objects. In contrast, congenital word-blindness occurs in children and reflects an inherent dysfunction, one present since birth. Here the clinical picture is more subtle; it evolves gradually as the child meets with continuing problems in reading as he progresses through school. As we shall see, the reading difficulty may be overlooked for long periods of time. The congenital form is much more circumscribed, affecting primarily reading, sometimes spoken language, but never muscle strength.</p>
			<p class="indent">From a neurological perspective, the difference in the two forms of the disorder is in the timing of the disruption to the laying down of neural systems within the brain. In the congenital form there is a glitch in the wiring when it is first laid down during embryonic development, and this miswiring is confined to a specific neural system (for reading). In the acquired condition, a lesion blocks an already working neural system and may extend to impact other systems as well.</p>
			<p class="indent">Morgan’s seminal report marked a watershed in our appreciation of unexpected reading difficulties in children. There soon came a flurry of reports of similar cases encountered by other physicians, almost exclusively eye surgeons, mostly from Britain but also from Europe, South America, and eventually the United States. But no one embraced or understood the significance of the disorder as fully as Hinshelwood did, nor was anyone as committed to bringing the disorder to the attention of as many of his colleagues.</p>
			<p class="indent"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_19" title="19"/>Although Hinshelwood initially reported cases of acquired word-blindness, he soon became absorbed with the congenital form of the condition. By 1912 he had reported in a series of papers and monographs at least a dozen cases of congenital word-blindness. These reports are noteworthy for the similarities shared by the children they describe. For example, in 1900, Hinshelwood details the cases of two children who simply could not learn to read, although everything about each of them suggested that they should not only be able to learn to read but should become capable readers as well.</p>
			<p class="indent">The first case describes an eleven-year-old boy who had been at school for four years before he was dismissed because <span id="ftn-7"/>“he could not be taught to read.” According to the boy’s father, the child was at the school for a number of years before his problem was even noticed, because</p>
			<blockquote class="offset">
				<p>he had such an excellent memory that he learned his lessons by heart; in fact, his first little reading-book he knew by heart, so that whenever it came to his turn he could from memory repeat his lesson, although he could not read the words. His father also informed me that in every respect, unless in his inability to learn to read, the boy seemed quite as intelligent as any of his brothers and sisters.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="indent">To demonstrate the child’s sharp mind, Hinshelwood describes stating the address of his eye clinic and also writing it on an envelope that the boy’s father then misplaced. Fortunately, the young boy’s quickness of mind allowed him and his father to keep their clinic appointment; Hinshelwood was quite impressed when the little boy was able immediately to repeat the address after “hearing me state it once.”</p>
			<p class="indent">A second case deals with a ten-year-old boy who did well in every academic subject with the exception of reading. As Hinshelwood comments, “He was apparently a bright, and in every respect an intelligent, boy…. In all departments of his studies where <i>the instruction was oral</i> he made good progress.” The boy’s father, a physician, thought the reading problem might be due to some visual defect and thus sought a consultation with Hinshelwood. Careful examination indicated that the difficulty in learning to read was “not owing to any defect of his intelligence or to any diminution of visual acuity. His father noted that the boy never reads for amusement. As his father expresses it, ‘it seems to take a great deal out of him.’ ”</p>
			<p class="indent">In 1902, Hinshelwood reported two additional cases of young, intelligent children who could not read at all well. One was a ten-year-old girl who <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_20" title="20"/>worked very hard in school and yet, <span id="ftn-8"/>“after four years of laborious effort” still read even the most basic book “with the greatest of difficulty.” He was impressed both by the extraordinary effort reading required for this child and by the incredible patience required of someone teaching her, so much so that “on several occasions [even] her mother abandoned the task in despair.” He remarks on the isolated nature of the difficulty, pointing out her general intelligence, her good vision, and her ability to do arithmetic.</p>
			<p class="indent">In the second case, that of a seven-year-old boy, Hinshelwood notes the stress on dyslexic children of trying to read and underscores the importance of patience and support:</p>
			<blockquote class="offset">
				<p>He does not even know all the letters of the alphabet, but if gently told when he was wrong and if given time, as a rule he can name the letters correctly at last. He can repeat the letters of the alphabet rapidly by heart.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="indent">Consistent with previous case reports, the boy experienced no difficulties if he was taught orally; in fact, the young man was so good at learning that he, too, “for a time…concealed the fact of his disability.” The person who, perhaps, knows the child best sums up his ability:</p>
			<blockquote class="offset">
				<p>His mother says that he is a smart, intelligent boy, even smarter and quicker in many respects than her other children, his one defect, according to her, being that he cannot be taught to read.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<h2 class="head"><b>THE CONTEXT OF CONGENITAL WORD-BLINDNESS</b></h2>
			<p>As clinicians, Hinshelwood and his colleagues were more than mere observers or cataloguers of their findings; they were concerned with the implications of the disorder: how long it lasts, how common it is, which groups of children are at highest risk, what treatment is best.</p>
			<p class="indent">In addition to providing clear descriptions of his patients, Hinshelwood focuses on the central concept underlying developmental dyslexia: an <i>unexpected</i> difficulty in learning to read. From a practical perspective this means that the weakness in reading is isolated and circumscribed, reflecting, according to Hinshelwood, a “local” rather than a generalized cerebral dysfunction. <i>A child who is slow in all cognitive skills would not be eligible for consideration <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_21" title="21"/>as dyslexic; a dyslexic child has to have some cognitive strengths, not only depressed reading functions.</i></p>
			<p class="indent">Having examined an ever-growing number of children with congenital word-blindness, Hinshelwood was convinced that this disorder was far more common than generally appreciated:</p>
			<blockquote class="offset">
				<p>I had little doubt that these cases were by no means so rare as the absence of recorded cases would lead us to infer. Their rarity, I thought, was accounted for by the fact that when they did occur, they were not recognized.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p>Accordingly, Hinshelwood worked hard to publicize his observations through lectures and published reports. Since the clinical picture is so characteristic, he knew that once a physician was aware of the disorder, diagnosis would be facilitated.</p>
			<p class="indent">As I will discuss in detail later, the diagnosis of dyslexia is a clinical one, based on the synthesis of information gleaned mainly from observations of the patient and from his or her history. Hinshelwood and other physicians of his day were able to make this diagnosis comfortably based solely on clinical presentation. <span id="ftn-9"/>Both Hinshelwood’s and Morgan’s reports predated the publication of the earliest version of the first standardized test (for IQ), the Binet-Simon Intelligence Scale, which did not become available until 1905.</p>
			<p class="indent">At about the same time, and after seeing a succession of children with congenital word-blindness, E. Treacher Collins, an eye surgeon at the Royal London Ophthalmic Hospital in Moorfields, England, concluded that the core symptoms of the disorder <span id="ftn-10"/>“were frequently overlooked and put down to mere stupidity, or some error of refraction, very much to the disadvantage of the individual, because the individual was often blamed, bullied, laughed at, for a defect which was not his fault but his misfortune.”</p>
			<p class="indent">Physicians treating patients with congenital word-blindness were also impressed with its impact on the entire family and across generations. Many commented on the important role played by a family member, usually the wife/mother, in assisting her spouse/child. For example:</p>
			<blockquote class="offset">
				<p><span id="ftn-11"/>The father…who is very involved in writing and has a leading position in industry has to have all his manuscripts corrected in detail by his wife…. Out of 5 children, 4 require every written paper to be corrected by their mother.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="indent"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_22" title="22"/>Above all, Hinshelwood was a physician, a practitioner to whom patients in a state of distress came desperately seeking help. Congenital word-blindness was more than a curiosity to him; he wanted to make sense of the disorder so that he could help his patients. He realized that for congenital word-blindness, treatment meant extending his perspective to include the educational establishment itself. In particular, he recognized the urgent need for early identification of children with congenital word-blindness:</p>
			<blockquote class="offset">
				<p><span id="ftn-12"/>It is a matter of the highest importance to recognise as early as possible the true nature of this defect, when it is met with in a child. It may prevent much waste of valuable time and may save the child from suffering and cruel treatment. When a child manifests great difficulty in learning to read and is unable to keep up in progress with its fellows, the cause is generally assigned to stupidity or laziness, and no systematised method is directed to the training of such a child. A little knowledge and careful analysis of the child’s case would soon make it clear that the difficulty experienced was due to a defect in the visual memory of words and letters; the child would then be regarded in the proper light as one with a congenital defect in a particular area of the brain, a defect which, however, can often be remedied by persevering and persistent training. The sooner the true nature of the defect is recognised, the better are the chances of the child’s improvement.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="indent">A model of the complete clinician, Hinshelwood was highly responsive to the needs of his patients. He urged schools to establish procedures for screening populations of children for signs of congenital word-blindness and to provide appropriate teaching to those children identified with the disorder. In 1904 he wrote:</p>
			<blockquote class="offset">
				<p><span id="ftn-13"/>In these days of scholastic reform, it is evident that there should be a systematic examination of all [these] children by a medical expert who would be able to differentiate the various defects and report as to the best means of dealing with the different groups. In our educational scheme this is a subject which has met with but scant attention, and, in my opinion, special provision for dealing with the education of [these] children on a scientific basis is one of the most crying needs in our present educational methods.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="indent"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_23" title="23"/>Hinshelwood made specific recommendations for children with dyslexia, as in this case:</p>
			<blockquote class="offset">
				<p><span id="ftn-14"/>On my advice no further attempts were made to teach him in the class, but he was advised to have special reading lessons by himself. The lessons were not to be too long, but were to be repeated frequently during the day at intervals so as to refresh and strengthen the visual impressions made in the first lesson. This plan was adopted, and succeeded in a degree which surpassed all our expectations.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="indent">In another case,</p>
			<blockquote class="offset">
				<p><span id="ftn-15"/>I advised them to make no further attempt to make him read in class with other boys. His mistakes and difficulties aroused the ridicule of the others, and this excited him and made him worse. I advised frequent short lessons by himself, both at the school and on his return home.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="indent">Dr. E. Nettleship, another turn-of-the-century ophthalmologist who saw dyslexic patients, understood the challenges in serving all dyslexics equally:</p>
			<blockquote class="offset">
				<p><span id="ftn-16"/>The detection of congenital word-blindness is easy in the children of well-educated parents, whose children receive much individual attention. It must be much more difficult, both to recognize and deal with, in the children who crowd our Infant Elementary Schools. That the condition had been differentiated, and is receiving attention from medical men, should lead presently to its being dealt with by tutors…and by the teachers in all Infant Schools. The education of [these] children, by more or less special methods, is already receiving more attention than formerly. If from amongst such children, those can be sifted whose only, or principal, difficulty is real inability to learn to read, the result cannot but be useful both to the individuals and the community.</p>
			</blockquote>
			<p class="indent">Today, as in Nettleship’s time, reading difficulties are often overlooked in children from disadvantaged circumstances. It is not that children from enriched backgrounds are “overidentified” as dyslexic but rather that far <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_24" title="24"/>too few poor children with the same difficulties are ever noticed, much less treated, for their reading problems.</p>
			<p class="indent">Dyslexia was increasingly noted and reported by physicians not only in Great Britain but also in Holland (1903), Germany (1903), and France (1906). Awareness of the disorder soon traveled across the Atlantic to South America (Buenos Aires, 1903) and then to the United States. Here the first report of childhood reading difficulties came in 1905 from a Cleveland ophthalmologist, Dr. W. E. Bruner, followed within a year by a second from a Denver physician, Edward Jackson, who described two cases of “Developmental Alexia (Congenital Word Blindness).” <span id="ftn-17"/>By 1909, E. Bosworth McCready, a Pittsburgh physician interested in congenital word-blindness, was able to locate forty-one reported cases of the disorder worldwide. As he noted, <span id="ftn-18"/>“While the majority of cases have been reported by ophthalmologists they have not in a single instance held the ocular [sic] conditions responsible for the word-blindness.” McCready, too, takes note of the seeming paradoxical association of dyslexia with creativity and intellectual superiority. He describes one man who <span id="ftn-19"/>“could not read but little in spite of every advantage…though he is now a brilliant and prominent member of a profession in which much reading is a <i>sine qua non</i>,” another dyslexic who is a judge, and still another who is a “writer of verse of unusual excellence.” Later I will talk about the contemporary counterparts of these gifted dyslexics.</p>
			<p class="indent">These cases of unexpected reading difficulties experienced by so many children (and adults) and observed through the eyes of an ever-growing cadre of concerned physicians can essentially be superimposed on one another; taken together, they create a composite image even stronger and sharper than the individual pictures. As such, these case reports represent a valuable legacy: They provide indisputable evidence of the unchanging and enduring nature of the characteristics of dyslexia in children.</p>
			<p class="indent">When I first came across these reports, I was stunned by the convergence between the historical and contemporary accounts of dyslexia. The basic template provided by these early reports remains intact. Now I will tell you about extraordinary scientific advances that have added a depth and a precision to our knowledge that was unimaginable just a few years ago.</p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>