<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" lang="en-US" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>Notes, Overcoming Dyslexia</title>
		<link href="../css/prhStyle.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/prhStyle-media-queries.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/9780307558893_style.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<meta charset="utf-8"/>
<meta content="urn:uuid:d230f54c-5167-4f8b-bb76-7426d9045212" name="Adept.expected.resource"/>
	</head>
	<body>
		<div class="page_top_padding" id="nts">
			<h1 class="bm_title"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_547" title="547"/><b>NOTES</b></h1>
			<h3 class="head"><b>CHAPTER 2: THE HISTORICAL ROOTS OF DYSLEXIA</b></h3>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c02_r1.xhtml#ftn-1">“He has always been”</a>: W. Pringle Morgan, “A Case of Congenital Word Blindness,” <i>British Medical Journal</i> (1896): 1378.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c02_r1.xhtml#ftn-2">What is perhaps the earliest</a>: A good discussion of the earliest reports of acquired reading problems can be found in Arthur L. Benton and Robert J. Joynt, “Early Descriptions of Aphasia,” <i>Archives of Neurology</i> 3 (August 1960): 109/205–126/222.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c02_r1.xhtml#ftn-3">“I can see [the words] but”</a>: Sir William Broadbent, “Cerebral Mechanisms of Speech and Thought,” <i>Transactions of the Royal Chirigal Society</i> 55 (1872): 145–94.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c02_r1.xhtml#ftn-4">“a complete text-blindness”</a>: Dr. Adolf Kussmaul, <i>Die Storungen Der Spache</i> (Leipzig: Verlag Von F.C.W. Vogel, 1877).</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c02_r1.xhtml#ftn-5">“there may be very great”</a>: in R. Berlin, <i>“Eine besondre Art der Wortblindheit (Dyslexia)”</i> (Weisbaden: Verlag von J. F. Bergmann, 1887), as quoted by James Hinshelwood, M.D., in “A Case of Dyslexia: A Peculiar Form of Word-Blindness,” <i>The Lancet</i> 2 (November 21, 1896): 1451–54. Here, too, can be found Berlin’s description of his patient, Herr B.’s, difficulty in reading: “reading of printed and written.”</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c02_r1.xhtml#ftn-6">“he could not read”</a>: J. Hinshelwood, M.D., “Word-Blindness and Visual Memory,” <i>The Lancet</i> (December 21, 1895): 1564–70.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c02_r1.xhtml#ftn-7">“he could not be taught to read”</a>: J. Hinshelwood, M.D., “Congenital Word-Blindness,” <i>The Lancet</i> (1900): 1506–8. All quotations describing both Case 1 and 2 are from this early article by Hinshelwood.</p>
			<p class="note"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_548" title="548"/><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c02_r1.xhtml#ftn-8">“after four years of laborious effort”</a>: J. Hinshelwood, “Congenital Word-Blindness, with Reports of Two Cases,” <i>Ophthalmic Review</i> 21 (1902): 91–99. The following quotations are also from this 1902 paper.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c02_r1.xhtml#ftn-9">Both Hinshelwood’s and Morgan’s reports</a>: Binet was first commissioned by the French government to develop a test in 1903; he did not publish his methods until 1905: A. M. Binet and T. Simon, “Methodes nouvelles pour le diagnostic du niveau intellectuel des anormaux,” <i>L’Année Psychologique</i> 11: 191–224.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c02_r1.xhtml#ftn-10">“were frequently overlooked”</a>: Quoted in discussion following J. H. Fisher, “Congenital Word-Blindness (Inability to Learn to Read),” <i>Transactions of the Ophthalmological Society of the United Kingdom</i> 30 (1910): 216–25. In addition to his clinical position at the ophthalmic hospital, Dr. Treacher Collins had been a professor at the Royal College of Surgeons.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c02_r1.xhtml#ftn-11">“The father…who is”</a>: In J. Lange, <i>Agnosia and Apraxia,</i> as quoted in J. W. Brown (ed.), <i>Agnosia and Apraxia: Selected Papers of Liepman, Lange, and Potzl</i> (Hillsdale, NJ, Erlbaum, 1988), p. 85.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c02_r1.xhtml#ftn-12">“It is a matter of”</a>: Hinshelwood, “Congenital Word-Blindness, with Reports of Two Cases.”</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c02_r1.xhtml#ftn-13">“In these days”</a>: J. Hinshelwood, “A Case of Congenital Word-Blindness,” <i>The Ophthalmoscope</i> 2 (1904): 399–405.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c02_r1.xhtml#ftn-14">“On my advice”</a>: Hinshelwood, “Congenital Word-Blindness, with Reports of Two Cases.”</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c02_r1.xhtml#ftn-15">“I advised them to”</a>: Hinshelwood, “A Case of Congenital Word-Blindness.” <i>The Ophthalmoscope,</i> 1904, Vol. II, pp. 399–405.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c02_r1.xhtml#ftn-16">“The detection of congenital”</a>: E. Nettleship, “Cases of Congenital Word-Blindness (Inability to Learn to Read),” <i>Ophthamic Review</i> 20 (1901): 61–67.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c02_r1.xhtml#ftn-17">By 1909, E. Bosworth McCready</a>: McCready reviews the number of reported cases of congenital word-blindness in “Congenital Word-Blindness as a Cause of Backwardness in School Children. Report of a Case Associated with Stuttering,” <i>Pennsylvania Medical Journal</i> 13 (1910): 278–84. The cases from the United States are described by E. Jackson in “Developmental Alexia (Congenital Word-Blindness),” <i>American Journal of the Medical Sciences</i> 131 (1906): 843–49.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c02_r1.xhtml#ftn-18">“While the majority of cases”</a>: McCready, “Congenital Word-Blindness as a Cause of Backwardness.”</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c02_r1.xhtml#ftn-19">“could not read but little”</a>: E. Bosworth McCready, “Defects in the Zone of Language (Word-Deafness and Word-Blindness) and Their Influence in Education and Behavior,” <i>American Journal of Psychiatry</i> 6 (old series 83) (1926–1927).</p>
			<h3 class="head"><b>CHAPTER 3: THE BIG PICTURE: WHO IS AFFECTED AND WHAT HAPPENS OVER TIME</b></h3>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c03_r1.xhtml#ftn-20">“Classification is the art of carving”</a>: R. E. Kendell, <i>The Role of Diagnosis in Psychiatry</i> (Oxford: Blackwell Scientific, 1975), as quoted by R. K. Blashfield, <i>The Classification of Psychopathology: Neo Kraepelinian and Quantitative Approaches</i> (New York: Plenum, 1984), p. 65.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c03_r1.xhtml#ftn-21">According to the most recent</a>: U.S. Department of Education, “The condition of education—Participation in education—Elementary/secondary—Children and youth with disabilities—last updated May (2019).” Available at <a href="https://nces.ed.gov/programs/coe/indicator_cgg.asp">https://nces.ed.gov/programs/coe/indicator_cgg.asp</a>, accessed 9/12/19.</p>
			<p class="note"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_549" title="549"/><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c03_r1.xhtml#ftn-22">Since dyslexia is estimated to comprise</a>: J. Lerner, “Educational Interventions in Learning Disabilities,” <i>Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry</i> 28 (1989): 326–31. <a href="https://nces.ed.gov/programs/coe/indicator_cgg.asp">https://nces.ed.gov/programs/coe/indicator_cgg.asp</a>, accessed 1/13/2018.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c03_r1.xhtml#ftn-23">Data from our Connecticut Longitudinal Study</a>: E. Ferrer, B. Shaywitz, et al., “Uncoupling of Reading and IQ Over Time: Empirical Evidence for a Definition of Dyslexia,” <i>Psychological Science</i> (2010): 93–101; S. Shaywitz, J. Fletcher, and B. Shaywitz, “Issues in the Definition and Classification of Attention Disorder,” <i>Topics in Language Disorders</i> 14 (1994): 1–25.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c03_r1.xhtml#ftn-24">The apparent large-scale under-identification of dyslexic children</a>: E. Ferrer, B. A. Shaywitz, et al., “Achievement Gap in Reading Is Present as Early as First Grade and Persists through Adolescence,” <i>Journal of Pediatrics</i> 167 (2015): 1121–25.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c03_r1.xhtml#ftn-25">In 1996 I published an article</a>: S. Shaywitz, “Dyslexia,” <i>Scientific American</i> 275 (1996): 98–104.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c03_r1.xhtml#ftn-26">In contrast, we found no significant difference</a>: S. E. Shaywtiz et al., “Prevalence of Reading Disability in Boys and Girls: Results of the Connecticut Longitudinal Study,” <i>Journal of the American Medical Association</i> 264 (1990): 998–1002.</p>
			<p class="note"><i><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c03_r1.xhtml#ftn-27">dyslexic readers do not catch up</a>:</i> Ferrer et al., “Achievement Gap in Reading Is Present as Early as First Grade.”</p>
			<h3 class="head"><b>CHAPTER 4: WHY SOME SMART PEOPLE CAN’T READ</b></h3>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c04_r1.xhtml#ftn-28">Gregory, a medical student</a>: For Gregory’s story, see S. Shaywitz, “Dyslexia,” <i>Scientific American</i> 275 (1996): 98–104.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c04_r1.xhtml#ftn-29">The problem is a linguistic one</a>: Evidence that the difficulty in dyslexia is within the language system is based on findings described by J. Torgesen, R. Wagner, and C. Rashotte, “Longitudinal Studies of Phonological Processing and Reading,” <i>Journal of Educational Psychology</i> 27 (1994): 276–86; and J. Fletcher et al., “Cognitive Profiles of Reading Disability: Comparisons of Discrepancy and Low Achievement Definitions,” <i>Journal of Educational Psychology</i> 84 (1994): 6–23.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c04_r1.xhtml#ftn-30">Think of the language system</a>: Explanations of the modular system can be found in D. Shankweiler and S. Crane, “Language Mechanisms and Reading Disorder: A Modular Approach,” <i>Cognition</i> 24 (1986): 139–68; J. A. Fodor, <i>The Modularity of Mind</i> (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press), 1983.</p>
			<h3 class="head"><b>CHAPTER 5: EVERYONE SPEAKS, BUT NOT EVERYONE READS</b></h3>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c05_r1.xhtml#ftn-31">As linguists Noah Chomsky and Steven Pinker</a>: Steven Pinker, <i>The Language Instinct</i> (New York: Morrow, 1994).</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c05_r1.xhtml#ftn-32">John DeFrancis, professor</a>: John DeFrancis, <i>Visible Speech</i> (Honolulu: University of Hawaii Press, 1989).</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c05_r1.xhtml#ftn-33">In 1989, linguist William Abler</a>: W. Abler, “On the Particulate Principle of Self-Defining Systems,” <i>Journal of Social and Biological Structures</i> 12 (1989): 1–13.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c05_r1.xhtml#ftn-34">A speaker can generate phonemes</a>: A. Liberman, “How Theories in Speech Affect Research in Reading and Writing,” in B. Blachman (ed.), <i>Foundations of Reading Acquisition and Dyslexia: Implications for Dyslexia</i> (Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum, 1997).</p>
			<p class="note"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_550" title="550"/><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c05_r1.xhtml#ftn-35">“Writing is not language”</a>: Leonard Bloomfield, <i>Language</i> (New York: Holt, Rinehart and Winston, 1933), p. 21.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c05_r1.xhtml#ftn-36">Suddenly the child appreciates</a>: <i>Phonemic awareness</i> refers to the ability to hear, notice, identify, and manipulate the individual sounds—phonemes—in spoken words. See J. Torgesen and P. Mathes, <i>A Basic Guide to Understanding, Assessing and Teaching Phonological Awareness</i> (Austin: Pro-Ed, 2000), p. 2.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c05_r1.xhtml#ftn-37">By age six and a half to seven years</a>: I. Liberman et al., “Explicit Syllable and Phoneme Segmentation in the Young Child,” <i>Journal of Experimental Child Psychology</i> 18 (1974): 201–12.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c05_r1.xhtml#ftn-38">British researchers Lynette Bradley and Peter Bryant</a>: L. Bradley and P. Bryant, “Categorizing Sounds and Learning to Read—a Causal Connection,” <i>Nature</i> 301 (1983): 419–21.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c05_r1.xhtml#ftn-39">In the 1990s we and other research groups</a>: J. M. Fletcher et al., “Cognitive Profiles of Reading Disability: Comparisons of Discrepancy and Low Achievement Definitions,” <i>Journal of Educational Psychology</i> 86 (1994): 6–23. See also K. E. Stanovich and L. S. Siegel, “Phenotypic Performance Profile of Children with Reading Disabilities: a Regression-Based Test of the Phonological-Core Variable-Difference Model,” <i>Journal of Educational Psychology</i> 86 (1994): 24–53.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c05_r1.xhtml#ftn-40">One type of test in particular</a>: R. Wagner, J. Torgesen, et al., <i>CTOPP-2: Comprehensive Test of Phonological Processing</i> (Austin: Pro-Ed, 2013).</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c05_r1.xhtml#ftn-41">Even in high school students</a>: S. Shaywitz et al., “Persistence of Dyslexia: The Connecticut Longitudinal Study at Adolescence,” <i>Pediatrics</i> 104 (1999): 1351–59.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c05_r1.xhtml#ftn-42">The two-step mechanism</a>: W. J. Levelt, A. Roelofs, and A. S. Meyer, “A Theory of Lexical Access in Speech Production,” <i>Behavioral and Brain Sciences</i> 22 (1999): 1–75. S. Hanly, “Tip-of-the-Tongue and Word Retrieval Deficits in Dyslexia,” <i>Journal of Learning Disabilities</i> 43 (2010): 15.</p>
			<h3 class="head"><b>CHAPTER 6: READING THE BRAIN</b></h3>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c06_r1.xhtml#ftn-43">The earliest conceptions of the mind</a>: Early conceptualizations of the mind are discussed in Stanley Finger, <i>Origins of Neuroscience</i> (New York: Oxford University Press, 1994), p. 8.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c06_r1.xhtml#ftn-44">Galen viewed the brain</a>: Ibid., p. 18.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c06_r1.xhtml#ftn-45">It was just such a circumstance</a>: Localization of expressive language, including the derivation of the term <i>aphasia,</i> occurred around 1861–65. See Finger, ibid., p. 379.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c06_r1.xhtml#ftn-46">The apothecary crisply clipped Harvey’s frenulum</a>: Ibid., quoted in A. R. Lecours, J-L. Nespoulous, and D. Pioger, “Jacques Lordat or the Birth of Cognitive Neuropsychology,” in E. Keller and M. Gopnik (eds.), <i>Motor and Sensory Processes of Language</i> (Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, 1987), p. 10.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c06_r1.xhtml#ftn-47">In 1973, with the advent</a>: A. B. Wolbarst, <i>Looking Within</i> (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1999), has user-friendly discussions of the various imaging modalities.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c06_r1.xhtml#ftn-48">“These facts seem to indicate”</a>: C. S. Roy and C. S. Sherrington, “On the Regulation of the Blood Supply of the Brain,” <i>Journal of Physiology</i> 1 (1890): 85.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c06_r1.xhtml#ftn-49">“It is, therefore, clear”</a>: L. Sokoloff, “Relationships Among Local Functional <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_551" title="551"/>Activity, Energy Metabolism, and Blood Flow from the Central Nervous System,” <i>Federation Proceedings</i> 40 (1981): 2311–16, quote on page 2315.</p>
			<h3 class="head"><b>CHAPTER 7: THE WORKING BRAIN READS</b></h3>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c07_r1.xhtml#ftn-50">Immediately after imaging</a>: It takes more time to complete the processing necessary for the functional MRI. Remember, for dyslexics, the problem is in the brain wiring—a glitch exposed by a functional MRI. The basic anatomic structures are intact.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c07_r1.xhtml#ftn-51">To begin we recruited</a>: B. A. Shaywitz et al., “Sex differences in the Functional Organization of the Brain for Language,” <i>Nature</i> 373 (1995): 607–9. The finding of a sex difference in the organization of the brain for language has been replicated by other investigators. See J. J. Jaeger et al., “Sex Differences in Brain Regions Activated by Grammatical and Reading Tasks,” <i>Neuroreport</i> 9 (1998): 2803–7; and K. Kansaku et al., “Sex Differences in Lateralization Revealed in the Posterior Language Areas,” <i>Cerebral Cortex</i> 10 (2000): 866–72.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c07_r1.xhtml#ftn-52">This represented the first demonstration</a>: Shaywitz et al., “Sex Differences in the Functional Organization of the Brain.”</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c07_r1.xhtml#ftn-53">First, the neural systems for reading</a>: B. A. Shaywitz et al., “Disruption of Posterior Brain Systems for Reading in Children with Developmental Dyslexia,” <i>Biological Psychiatry</i> 52 (2002): 101–10.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c07_r1.xhtml#ftn-54">As early as 1891</a>: J. Dejerine, “Sur un cas de cécité verbale avec agraphie, suivi d’autopsie,” <i>C.R. Société du Biologie</i> 43 (1891): 197–201; see also his “Contribution à l’étude anatomopathologique et clinique des differentes variétés de cécité verbale,” <i>Mémoires de la Société de Biologie</i> 4 (1892): 61–90. These brain regions were first proposed on the basis of postmortem studies of adults with acquired inability to read (acquired dyslexia).</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c07_r1.xhtml#ftn-55">It responds very rapidly</a>: C. Price, C. Moore, and R. S. J. Frackowiak, “The Effect of Varying Stimulus Rate and Duration of Brain Activity During Reading,” <i>Neuroimage</i> 3 (1996): 40–52.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c07_r1.xhtml#ftn-56">This conceptualization has now been strongly challenged</a>: C. J. Price and J. T. Devlin, “The Interactive Account of Ventral Occipito Temporal Contributions to Reading,” <i>Trends in Cognitive Science</i> 15, no. 6 (June 2011): 246–53.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c07_r1.xhtml#ftn-57">These data from fMRI studies</a>: C. Price and A. Mechelli, “Reading and Reading Disturbance,” <i>Current Opinion in Neurobiology</i> 15 (2005): 231–8; F. Richlan, M. Kronbichler, and H. Wimmer, “Functional Abnormalities in the Dyslexic Brain: A Quantitative Meta-analysis of Neuroimaging Studies,” <i>Human Brain Mapping</i> 30, no. 10 (2009): 3299–308. F. Richlan, M. Kronbichler, and H. Wimmer, “Meta-Analyzing Brain Dysfunctions in Dyslexic Children and Adults, <i>Neuroimage</i> 56 (2011): 1735–42; R. Peterson and B. Pennington, “Developmental Dyslexia,” <i>Lancet</i> (2012); S. Shaywitz and B. Shaywitz, “Dyslexia (Specific Reading Disability),” <i>Biological Psychiatry</i> 57 (2005): 1301–9.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c07_r1.xhtml#ftn-58">Similar findings have been reported</a>: M. Kronbichler, F. Hutzler, et al., “Evidence for a Dysfunction of Left Posterior Reading Areas in German Dyslexic Readers,” <i>Neuropsychologia</i> 44, no. 10 (2006): 1822–32; S. Brambati, C. Termine, et al., “Neuropsychological Deficits and Neural Dysfunction in Familial Dyslexia,” <i>Brain Research</i> 1113, no. 1 (2006): 174–85.</p>
			<p class="note"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_552" title="552"/><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c07_r1.xhtml#ftn-59">Some studies in Chinese</a>: W. Siok, Z. Niu, et al., “A Structural-Functional Basis for Dyslexia in the Cortex of Chinese Readers,” <i>Proceedings of the National Academy of Science-USA</i> 105 (2008): 5561–66; W. Siok, C. Perfetti, et al., “Biological Abnormality of Impaired Reading Is Constrained by Culture,” <i>Nature</i> 431 (2004): 71–76; W. Siok, J. Spinks, et al., “Developmental Dyslexia Is Characterized by the Coexistence of Visuospatial and Phonological Disorders in Chinese Children,” <i>Current Biology</i> 19 (2009): R890–92. Other studies of Chinese dyslexics find other differences in brain activation. For example, one study demonstrated reduced activation for Chinese dyslexics in the right occipital cortex, consonant with a language-specific role of the right visual cortex in Chinese reading and suggesting a deficit in holistic visuo-orthographic analysis in Chinese dyslexi. See L. Liu, W. Wang, et al., “Similar Alterations in Brain Function for Phonological and Semantic Processing to Visual Characters in Chinese Dyslexia,” <i>Neuropsychologia</i> 50 (2012): 2224–32.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c07_r1.xhtml#ftn-60">When does the neural signature</a>: N. M. Raschle, J. Zuk, and N. Gaab, “Functional Characteristics of Developmental Dyslexia in Left-Hemispheric Posterior Brain Regions Predate Reading Onset,” <i>Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA</i> 109, no. 6 (2012): 2156–61; Z. M. Saygin, E. S. Norton, et al., “Tracking the Roots of Reading Ability: White Matter Volume and Integrity Correlate with Phonological Awareness in Prereading and Early-Reading Kindergarten Children,” <i>Journal of Neuroscience</i> 33 (2013): 13251–58.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c07_r1.xhtml#ftn-61">In fact, this synchrony between anatomically distinct regions</a>: M. P. van den Heuvel and H. E. Hulshoff Pol, “Exploring the Brain Network: A Review of Resting-State fMRI Functional Connectivity,” <i>European Neuropsychopharmacology</i> 20, no. 8 (2010): 519–34.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c07_r1.xhtml#ftn-62">Although there have been some functional connectivity</a>: B. Horwitz, J. Rumsey, and B. Donohue, “Functional Connectivity of the Angular Gyrus in Normal Reading and Dyslexia,” <i>Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences USA</i> 95 (1998): 8939–44; M. Koyama et al., “Cortical Signatures of Dyslexia and Remediation: An Intrinsic Functional Connectivity Approach,” <i>PLOS One</i> 8:e55454 (2013); L. Stanberry et al., “Low-Frequency Signal Changes Reflect Differences in Functional Connectivity Between Good Readers and Dyslexics During Continuous Phoneme Mapping,” <i>Magnetic Resonance Imaging</i> 24 (2006): 217–29; S. van der Mark et al., “The Left Occipitotemporal System in Reading: Disruption of Focal fMRI Connectivity to Left Inferior Frontal and Inferior Parietal Language Areas in Children with Dyslexia,” <i>Neuroimage</i> 54 (2011): 2426–36; A. Vogel, F. Miezin, et al., “The Putative Visual Word Form Area Is Functionally Connected to the Dorsal Attention Network,” <i>Cerebral Cortex</i> 22 (2012): 537–49.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c07_r1.xhtml#ftn-63">Rather than examining connectivity</a>: E. Finn et al., “Disruption of Functional Networks in Dyslexia: A Whole-Brain, Data-Driven Approach to fMRI Connectivity Analysis,” <i>Biologic Psychiatry</i> 76 (2013): 397–404.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c07_r1.xhtml#ftn-64">New findings</a>: M. Reynolds and D. Besner, “Reading Aloud Is Not Automatic: Processing Capacity Is Required to Generate a Phonological Code from Print,” <i>Journal of Experimental Psychology: Human Perception and Performance</i> 32 (2006): 303–23; S. Shaywitz and B. A. Shaywitz, “Paying Attention to Reading: <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_553" title="553"/>The Neurobiology of Reading and Dyslexia,” <i>Developmental Psychopathology</i> 20 (2008): 1329–49.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c07_r1.xhtml#ftn-65">This region has long been known to</a>: I. Kovelman, E. S. Norton, et al., “Brain Basis of Phonological Awareness for Spoken Language in Children and Its Disruption in Dyslexia,” <i>Cerebral Cortex</i> 22, no. 4 (2012): 754–64.</p>
			<h3 class="head"><b>CHAPTER 8: DIAGNOSING DYSLEXIA—WHY, WHAT, AND HOW</b></h3>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c08_r1.xhtml#ftn-66">“Learning disabilities, as described”</a>: The Individuals with Disabilities Education Act (IDEA), enacted in 1975 as the Education for All Handicapped Children Act (EAHCA) and then updated as IDEA in 1990 and updated again in 2004, is designed to ensure that grade-school and secondary-school students with a disability are provided a free appropriate public education (FAPE) in the least restrictive environment (LRE) tailored to their individual needs.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c08_r1.xhtml#ftn-67">In September 2014, when I testified</a>: The full testimony can be found at <a href="https://science.house.gov/imo/media/doc/Shaywitz%20Testimony.pdf">https://science.house.gov/imo/media/doc/Shaywitz%20Testimony.pdf</a>.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c08_r1.xhtml#ftn-68">These data provide the long-sought-after</a>: E. Ferrer, B. Shaywitz, et al., “Uncoupling of Reading and IQ over Time: Empirical Evidence for a Definition of Dyslexia,” <i>Psychological Science</i> 21 (2010): 93–101.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c08_r1.xhtml#ftn-69">So it should come as no surprise</a>: S. E. Shaywitz et al., “Neural Systems for Compensation and Persistence: Young Adult Outcome of Childhood Reading Disability,” <i>Biological Psychiatry</i> 54 (2003): 25–33.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c08_r1.xhtml#ftn-70">I can think</a>: Interview with Steven Spielberg by Quinn Bradley, posted online September 29, 2012, <a href="https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4N6RKHOHMJQ">https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=4N6RKHOHMJQ</a>, accessed 9/12/19.</p>
			<h3 class="head"><b>CHAPTER 9: RECOGNIZING DYSLEXIA’S EARLY IMPACT: SPOKEN LANGUAGE</b></h3>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c09_r1.xhtml#ftn-71">In England, researchers asked</a>: P. E. Bryant et al., “Nursery Rhymes, Phonological Skills and Reading,” <i>Journal of Child Language</i> 16 (1989): 407–28.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c09_r1.xhtml#ftn-72">The British researchers</a>: L. Bradley and P. E. Bryant, “Difficulties in Auditory Organization as a Possible Cause of Reading Backwardness,” <i>Nature</i> 271 (1978): 746–47.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c09_r1.xhtml#ftn-73">Much to the chagrin</a>: E. L. Meaburn et al., “Quantitative Trait Locus Association Scan of Early Reading Disability and Ability Using Pooled DNA and 100K SNP Microarrays in a Sample of 5760 Children,” <i>Molecular Psychiatry</i> 13 (2008): 729–40.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c09_r1.xhtml#ftn-74">“If you told a modern geneticist”</a>: E. Yong, “What If (Almost) Every Gene Affects (Almost) Everything?,” <i>The Atlantic,</i> June 16, 2017, <a href="https://www.theatlantic.com/science/archive/2017/06/its-like-all-connected-man/530532/">https://www.theatlantic.com/science/archive/2017/06/its-like-all-connected-man/530532/</a>, accessed 9/13/19.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c09_r1.xhtml#ftn-75">“the popular misconception”</a>: See <a href="https://researchtheheadlines.org/2018/09/10/talking-headlines-simon-fisher">https://researchtheheadlines.org/2018/09/10/talking-headlines-simon-fisher</a>, accessed 9/10/19.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c09_r1.xhtml#ftn-76">“that common diseases involve”</a>: D. Duncan, “Scientist at Work: Eric Shadt, Enlisting Computers to Unravel the True Complexity of Disease,” <i>New York Times,</i> August 24, 2009.</p>
			<p class="note"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_554" title="554"/><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c09_r1.xhtml#ftn-77">As conceptualized by Dorothy Bishop</a>: Dorothy V. Bishop, <i>Bishopblog,</i> June 16, 2013, <a href="http://deevybee.blogspot.com/2013/06/overhyped-genetic-findings-case-of.html">http://deevybee.blogspot.com/2013/06/overhyped-genetic-findings-case-of.html</a>, accessed 9/10/19.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c09_r1.xhtml#ftn-78">“it would be ineffective”</a>: D. V. M. Bishop, “The Interface Between Genetics and Psychology: Lessons from Developmental Dyslexia,” <i>Proceedings of the Royal Society</i> 282 (2014): 31–39.</p>
			<h3 class="head"><b>CHAPTER 10: RECOGNIZING DYSLEXIA’S IMPACT ON LEARNING TO READ</b></h3>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c10_r1.xhtml#ftn-79">When a child first begins</a>: U. Frith, “Beneath the Surface of Developmental Dyslexia,” in K. Patterson, J. Marshall, and M. Coltheart (eds.), <i>Surface Dyslexia</i> (London: Erlbaum, 1985), 301–30.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c10_r1.xhtml#ftn-80">We now know that</a>: P. Maisonheimer, P. Drum, and L. Ehri, “Does Environmental Print Identification Lead Children into Word Reading?,” <i>Journal of Reading Behavior</i> 16 (1984): 363–67.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c10_r1.xhtml#ftn-81">Children can memorize</a>: W. Nagy and P. Herman, “Breadth and Depth of Vocabulary Knowledge: Implications for Acquisition and Instruction,” in M. McKeown and M. Curtis (eds.), <i>The Nature of Vocabulary Acquisition</i> (Hillsdale, NJ: Erlbaum, 1987), 19–35.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c10_r1.xhtml#ftn-82">If a child knows</a>: L. C. Ehri and L. S. Wilce, “Movement into Reading: Is the First Stage of Printed Word Learning Visual or Phonetic?,” <i>Reading Research Quarterly</i> 20 (1985): 163–79.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c10_r1.xhtml#ftn-83">Such children might read</a>: For research on the tendency to confuse words that have some similar letters but no phonologic similarities, see M. Stuart, “Factors Influencing Word Recognition in Pre-Reading Children,” <i>British Journal of Psychology</i> 81 (1990): 135–46; and M. Stuart and M. Coltheart, “Does Reading Develop in a Sequence of Stages?,” <i>Cognition</i> 30 (1988): 139–81.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c10_r1.xhtml#ftn-84">Reading comprehension develops</a>: T. G. Sticht et al., <i>Auding and Reading: A Developmental Model</i> (Alexandria, VA: Human Resources Research Organization, 1974); What Works Clearinghouse, “Foundational Skills to Support Reading for Understanding in Kindergarten Through 3rd Grade,” July 2016.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c10_r1.xhtml#ftn-85">Reading researchers Anne Cunningham and Keith Stanovich</a>: A. E. Cunningham and K. E. Stanovich, “What Reading Does for the Mind,” <i>American Educator</i> 22 (1998): 8–15.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c10_r1.xhtml#ftn-86">Books offer almost three times</a>: Ibid.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c10_r1.xhtml#ftn-87">Benchmarks</a>: These markers are adapted from C. E. Snow, M. S. Burns, and P. Griffin (eds.), <i>Preventing Reading Difficulties in Young Children</i> (Washington, DC: National Academy Press, 1998), 80–83.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c10_r1.xhtml#ftn-88">So it is easy</a>: E. Ferrer, B. A. Shaywitz, et al., “Achievement Gap in Reading Is Present as Early as First Grade and Persists Through Adolescence,” <i>Journal of Pediatrics</i> 167 (2015): 1121–25.</p>
			<h3 class="head"><b>CHAPTER 11: SHOULD MY CHILD BE EVALUATED FOR DYSLEXIA?</b></h3>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c11_r1.xhtml#ftn-89">“Once children fall behind”</a>: J. K. Torgesen, “Catch Them Before They Fall: Identification and Assessment to Prevent Reading Failure in Young Children,” <i>American Educator</i> 22 (1998): 32–39, quote on p. 32.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c11_r1.xhtml#ftn-90">Without a specific diagnosis</a>: The persistence of dyslexia has been demonstrated <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_555" title="555"/>in the Connecticut Longitudinal Study sample. Among the many published reports of this study are B. A. Shaywitz et al., “A Matthew Effect for IQ but Not for Reading: Results from a Longitudinal Study,” <i>Reading Research Quarterly</i> 30 (1995): 894–906; S. E. Shaywitz, J. M. Fletcher, et al., “Persistence of Dyslexia: The Connecticut Longitudinal Study at Adolescence,” <i>Pediatrics</i> 104 (1999): 1351–68; E. Ferrer, B. A. Shaywitz, et al., “Uncoupling of Reading and IQ over Time: Empirical Evidence for a Definition of Dyslexia,” <i>Psychological Science</i> 21 (2010): 93–101; E. Ferrer, B. A. Shaywitz, et al., “Achievement Gap in Reading Is Present as Early as First Grade and Persists Through Adolescence,” <i>Journal of Pediatrics</i> 167 (2015): 1121–25.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c11_r1.xhtml#ftn-91">For the first time, federal law</a>: The law defines dyslexia as “unexpected difficulty in reading for an individual who has the intelligence to be a much better reader.”</p>
			<h3 class="head"><b>CHAPTER 12: DIAGNOSING DYSLEXIA IN THE SCHOOL-AGE CHILD</b></h3>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c12_r1.xhtml#ftn-92">Today’s evaluation for dyslexia</a>: S. Shaywitz, “Dyslexia,” <i>New England Journal of Medicine</i> 333 (1998): 307–12.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c12_r1.xhtml#ftn-93">This unexpected nature of dyslexia</a>: E. Ferrer, B. A. Shaywitz, et al., “Uncoupling of Reading and IQ over Time: Empirical Evidence for a Definition of Dyslexia,” <i>Psychological Science</i> 21, no. 1 (2010): 93–101.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c12_r1.xhtml#ftn-94">This is measured</a>: K. Schrank, N. Mather, and R. Woodcock, <i>Woodcock-Johnson-IV</i> (Riverside, 2014); <i>Wechsler Individual Achievement Test,</i> 3rd ed. (WIAT-III) (Wechsler, 2009); A. S. Kaufman and N. L. Kaufman, <i>Kaufman Test of Educational Achievement,</i> 3rd ed. (KTEA-3) (Boston: Pearson, 2014); V. L. Brown, J. L. Wiederholt, D. D. Hammill, et al., <i>Test of Reading Comprehension,</i> 4th ed. (TORC-4) (Austin: Pro-Ed, 2009).</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c12_r1.xhtml#ftn-95">The Test of Word Reading Efficiency</a>: J. Torgesen, R. Wagner, and C. Rashotte, <i>TOWRE-2: Test of Word Reading Efficiency</i> (Austin: Pro-Ed, 2013).</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c12_r1.xhtml#ftn-96">Oral reading fluency</a>: J. Wiederholt and B. Bryant, <i>Gray Oral Reading Test-5 Examiner’s Manual</i> (Austin: Pro-Ed, 2012).</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c12_r1.xhtml#ftn-97">Helpful spelling tests</a>: S. C. Larsen, D. Hammill, and L. Moats, <i>Test of Written Spelling-5th ed.</i> (TWS-5) (Austin: Pro-Ed, 2013).</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c12_r1.xhtml#ftn-98">Because dyslexia is defined</a>: D. Wechsler, <i>Wechsler Intelligence Scale for Children,</i> 5th ed. (Boston: Pearson, 2014).</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c12_r1.xhtml#ftn-99">The Comprehensive Test of Phonological Processing</a>: R. Wagner, J. Torgesen, et al., <i>CTOPP-2: Comprehensive Test of Phonological Processing</i> (Austin: Pro-Ed, 2013).</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c12_r1.xhtml#ftn-100">In the most commonly used test</a>: D. M. Dunn, <i>Peabody Picture Vocabulary Test,</i> 5th ed. (Bloomington, MN: NCS Pearson, 2019).</p>
			<h3 class="head"><b>CHAPTER 13: IDENTIFYING THE AT-RISK CHILD</b></h3>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c13_r1.xhtml#ftn-101">Researchers like myself have recognized</a>: D. L. Compton et al., “Selecting At-Risk Readers in First Grade for Early Intervention: Eliminating False Positives and Exploring the Promise of a Two-Stage Gated Screening Process,” <i>Journal of Educational Psychology</i> 102 (2010): 327–40; M. J. Snowling, “Early Identification and Interventions for Dyslexia: A Contemporary View,” <i>Journal of Research in Special Educational Needs</i> 13 (2013): 7–14.</p>
			<p class="note"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_556" title="556"/><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c13_r1.xhtml#ftn-102">We found that</a>: The Multigrade Inventory for Teachers was developed for the Connecticut Longitudinal Study to capture the valuable observations of the classroom teacher. The MIT’s development and use are described in M. E. Agronin, J. M. Holahan, et al., “The Multi-Grade Inventory for Teachers (MIT): Scale Development, Reliability, and Validity of an Instrument to Assess Children with Attentional Deficits and Learning Disabilities,” in S. E. Shaywitz and B. A. Shaywitz (eds.), <i>Attention Deficit Disorder Comes of Age: Toward the Twenty-First Century</i> (Austin: Pro-Ed, 1992), pp. 89–116; and J. M. Holahan et al., “Developmental Trends in Teacher Perceptions of Student Cognitive and Behavioral Status as Measured by the Multi-Grade Inventory for Teachers: Evidence from a Longitudinal Study,” in D. M. Molfese and V. J. Molfese (eds.), <i>Developmental Variations in Learning: Applications to Social, Executive Function, Language, and Reading Skills</i> (Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum, 2002), 23–55.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c13_r1.xhtml#ftn-103">This screener</a>: The clinical validity of a screener is evaluated based on sensitivity, or its strength in finding true positives (individuals who have dyslexia); specificity, or its strength in eliminating true negatives (individuals who do not have dyslexia); and AUC (Area Under the Receiver Operating Characteristics curve). For a screening measure to be useful it must yield a high percentage of true positives, that is, sensitivity rates of .70 and above, and a high percentage of true negatives, that is, specificity rates of .70 and above. For the Shaywitz DyslexiaScreen™, sensitivity = .74; specificity = .81. AUC estimates range from .50 (chance accuracy) to 1.00 (perfect accuracy). Many of the strongest-performing clinical assessment inventories deliver AUC estimates in the 0.7 to 0.8 range. AUC estimates of .81 (kindergarten) and .89 (first grade) for the Shaywitz DyslexiaScreen™ indicate that this screener has good accuracy in separating children at-risk for dyslexia from those not at-risk.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c13_r1.xhtml#ftn-104">New data from the Connecticut Longitudinal Study</a>: E. Ferrer, B. A. Shaywitz, et al., “Achievement Gap in Reading Is Present as Early as First Grade and Persists Through Adolescence,” <i>Journal of Pediatrics</i> 167 (2015): 1121–25.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c13_r1.xhtml#ftn-105">Most clinicians and researchers</a>: R. Wagner, J. Torgesen, et al., <i>Comprehensive Test of Phonological Processing,</i> 2nd ed. (CTOPP-2) (Austin: Pro-Ed, 2013).</p>
			<p class="note"><i><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c13_r1.xhtml#ftn-106">I strongly recommend not delaying kindergarten entry</a>:</i> Compelling data regarding delayed kindergarten entry are presented by F. Morrison, E. Griffith, and D. Alberts, “Nature-Nurture in the Classroom: Entrance Age, School Readiness, and Learning in Children,” <i>Developmental Psychology</i> 33 (1997): 254–62; and F. Morrison, L. Smith, and M. Dow-Ehrenberger, “Education and Cognitive Development: A Natural Experiment,” <i>Developmental Psychology</i> 31 (1995): 78–79. These are discussed by V. W. Berninger in <i>Guides for Intervention: Reading, Writing</i> (San Antonio: Psychological Corporation, 1998), pp. 30–31. Another, more recent article supports this conclusion: M. Andrew, “The Scarring Effects of Primary-Grade Retention? A Study of Cumulative Advantage in the Educational Career,” <i>Social Forces</i> 93, no. 2 (2014): 653–85.</p>
			<h3 class="head"><b>CHAPTER 14: DIAGNOSING BRIGHT YOUNG ADULTS</b></h3>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c14_r1.xhtml#ftn-107">As comedian Richard Pryor</a>: Ascribed to Richard Pryor by Bob McTeer, president and CEO, Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, in remarks before the Cato <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_557" title="557"/>Institute conference “Monetary Policy in the New Economy,” Washington, DC, October 19, 2000.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c14_r1.xhtml#ftn-108">In 1996, in celebration</a>: S. Shaywitz, “Dyslexia,” <i>Scientific American</i> 275 (1996): 98–104.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c14_r1.xhtml#ftn-109">Numerous studies conducted</a>: S. Shaywitz et al., “Persistence of Dyslexia: The Connecticut Longitudinal Study at Adolescence,” <i>Pediatrics</i> 104 (1999): 1351–59; M. Bruck, “Persistence of Dyslexics’ Phonological Awareness Deficits,” <i>Developmental Psychology</i> 28 (1992): 874–86; R. Felton, C. Naylor, and F. Wood, “Neuropsychological Profile of Adult Dyslexics,” <i>Brain and Language</i> 39 (1990): 485–97; and R. Davidson and J. Strucker, “Patterns of Word Recognition Error Among Adult Basic Education Students,” <i>Scientific Studies of Reading</i> (2002): 299–316.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c14_r1.xhtml#ftn-110">Studies have confirmed</a>: E. Paulesu et al., “Dyslexia-Cultural Diversity and Biological Unity,” <i>Science</i> 291 (2001): 2165–67; F. Richlan, M. Kronbichler, and H. Wimmer, “Meta-Analyzing Brain Dysfunctions in Dyslexic Children and Adults,” <i>Neuroimage</i> 56 (2011): 1735–42.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c14_r1.xhtml#ftn-111">This was legally affirmed in a 2014 settlement</a>: U.S. Department of Justice, Office of Public Affairs, “Law School Admission Council Agrees to Systemic Reforms and $7.73 Million Payment to Settle Justice Department’s Nationwide Disability Discrimination Lawsuit,” May 20, 2014, <a href="https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/law-school-admission-council-agrees-systemic-reforms-and-773-million-payment-settle-justice">https://www.justice.gov/opa/pr/law-school-admission-council-agrees-systemic-reforms-and-773-million-payment-settle-justice</a>, accessed 9/11/19.</p>
			<h3 class="head"><b>CHAPTER 15: RECOGNIZING DYSLEXIA IN ADULT MIDLIFE WOMEN</b></h3>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c15_r1.xhtml#ftn-112">As noted in the report</a>: T. Wizemen and M. Pardue, “Report of Committee on Understanding the Biology of Sex and Gender Differences: Exploring the Biological Contributions to Human Health: Does Sex Matter?,” Board of Health Sciences Policy, Institute of Medicine (Washington, DC: National Academies Press, 2001).</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c15_r1.xhtml#ftn-113">The initial study</a>: S. E. Shaywitz, B. A. Shaywitz, et al., “Estrogen Alters Brain Activation Patterns in Postmenopausal Women During Working Memory Tasks,” <i>Journal of the American Medical Association</i> 281 (1999): 1197–1202.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c15_r1.xhtml#ftn-114">In our next study</a>: S. E. Shaywitz, F. Naftolin, et al., “Estrogen Improves Oral Reading and Short-Term Memory in Midlife Postmenopausal Women,” <i>Menopause</i> 10 (2003): 420–26.</p>
			<h3 class="head"><b>CHAPTER 16: ALL CHILDREN CAN BE TAUGHT TO READ</b></h3>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c16_r1.xhtml#ftn-115">Strong scientific data</a>: U.S. Department of Education, Institute of Education Sciences, “Evaluation of Response to Intervention Practices for Elementary School Reading,” November 2015. See also “RTI Practice Falls Short of Promise, Research Finds,” <i>Education Week,</i> November 11, 2015.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c16_r1.xhtml#ftn-116">There is now evidence</a>: J. K. Torgesen, “The Prevention of Reading Difficulties,” <i>Journal of School Psychology</i> 40 (2002): 7–26.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c16_r1.xhtml#ftn-117">For the first time</a>: U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, National Reading Panel, <i>Teaching Children to Read: An Evidence-Based Assessment of the <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_558" title="558"/>Scientific Research Literature and Its Implications for Reading Instruction</i> (Washington, DC: National Institute of Child Health and Human Development, 2000). The report is available on the panel’s website: http://www.nationalreadingpanel.org [inactive], and at <a href="https://www.nichd.nih.gov/">https://www.nichd.nih.gov/</a>. It is available in its entirety or as an abbreviated (thirty-three-page) executive summary.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c16_r1.xhtml#ftn-118">“solid answers”</a>: Gina Kolata, “Guesses and Hype Give Way to Data in Study of Education,” <i>New York Times,</i> Sept. 2, 2013, <a href="https://www.nytimes.com/2013/09/03/science/applying-new-rigor-in-studying-education.html">https://www.nytimes.com/2013/09/03/science/applying-new-rigor-in-studying-education.html</a>, accessed 9/13/19.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c16_r1.xhtml#ftn-119">During the time I served</a>: “The Impact of Two Professional Development Interventions on Early Reading Instruction and Achievement,” What Works Clearinghouse, September 2008, p. xv: “Although there were positive impacts on teachers’ knowledge of scientifically based reading instruction and on one of the three instructional practices promoted by the study, neither PD intervention resulted in significantly higher student test scores at the end of the one-year treatment…. The added effect of the coaching intervention on teacher practices in the implementation year was not statistically significant…. There were no statistically significant impacts on measured teacher or student outcomes in the year following the treatment.”</p>
			<h3 class="head"><b>CHAPTER 17: HELPING YOUR CHILD BREAK THE READING CODE</b></h3>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c17_r1.xhtml#ftn-120">Teachers and parents preferring</a>: These programs have been evaluated positively by the What Works Clearinghouse as having evidence to support their claims that they will improve phonemic awareness and phonics in young children.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c17_r1.xhtml#ftn-121">Brain imaging technology</a>: Expertise depends on practice, elegantly demonstrated by T. Elbert et al., “Increased Cortical Representation of the Fingers of the Left Hand in String Players,” <i>Science</i> 270 (1995): 305–7.</p>
			<h3 class="head"><b>CHAPTER 18: HELPING YOUR CHILD BECOME A READER</b></h3>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c18_r1.xhtml#ftn-122">As children reach higher grades</a>: J. M. Holahan, E. Ferrer, et al., “Growth in Reading Comprehension and Verbal Ability from Grades 1 through 9,” <i>Journal of Psychoeducational Assessment</i> 36, no. 4 (2016): 307–21.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c18_r1.xhtml#ftn-123">A child <i>learns to read</i></a><i>:</i> Noted initially by educator Jeanne Chall.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c18_r1.xhtml#ftn-124">As the National Reading Panel noted</a>: But note that one of the best specialized schools for dyslexic children, Windward School (see <a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c24_r1.xhtml#page_327">this page</a>), does not typically offer one-to-one instruction.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c18_r1.xhtml#ftn-125">More extensive word lists</a>: Fry instant words are the most common words used in English. They were created in 1996 by Dr. Edward Fry, who expanded on the Dolch word list, a list compiled by Edward William Dolch in 1948.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c18_r1.xhtml#ftn-126">“curiosity about the content”</a>: Professor Tim Shanahan, <a href="http://www.shanahanonliteracy.com/blog/further-explanation-of-teaching-students-with-challenging-text">http://www.shanahanonliteracy.com/blog/further-explanation-of-teaching-students-with-challenging-text</a>, accessed 9/14/19.</p>
			<h3 class="head"><b>CHAPTER 19: HELPING YOUR CHILD BECOME A SKILLED READER</b></h3>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c19_r1.xhtml#ftn-127">The most recent National Assessment</a>: “NAEPFact: Listening to Children Read Aloud: Oral Fluency,” <a href="https://nces.ed.gov/pubs95/web/95762.asp">https://nces.ed.gov/pubs95/web/95762.asp</a>, accessed <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_559" title="559"/>06/09/19. Fifty-five percent of fourth-graders were considered to be fluent; 13 percent met the criteria for the highest rating in their oral reading.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c19_r1.xhtml#ftn-128">More recent studies replicate</a>: T. Rasinski, C. Blachowicz, and K. Lems (eds.), <i>Fluency Instruction,</i> 2nd ed. (New York: Guilford, 2012).</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c19_r1.xhtml#ftn-129">Results indicate that while both methods</a>: D. V. Dennis, K. L. Solic, and R. L. Allington, “Hijacking Fluency and Instructionally Informative Assessments,” in Rasinski, Blachowicz, and Lems, <i>Fluency Instruction;</i> C. M. Connor, P. A. Alberto, et al., “Improving Reading Outcomes for Students with or at Risk for Reading Disabilities: A Synthesis of the Contributions from the Institute of Education Sciences Research Centers” (Washington, DC: National Center for Special Education Research, 2014), NCSER 2014-3000.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c19_r1.xhtml#ftn-130">“while reading aloud”</a>: M. Kuhn, “Helping Students Become Accurate, Expressive Readers: Fluency Instruction for Small Groups,” <i>Reading Teacher</i> 58, no. 4 (December 2004/January 2005): 342.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c19_r1.xhtml#ftn-131">As the child’s fluency improves</a>: <i>Shanahan on Literacy,</i> June 26, 2016; O’Connor, Swanson, and Geraghty, “Improvement in Reading Rate Under Independent and Difficult Text Levels: Influences on Word and Comprehension Skills,” <i>Journal of Educational Psychology</i> 102 (2010): 1–19.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c19_r1.xhtml#ftn-132">The size of a child’s vocabulary</a>: First-grade vocabulary predicted students’ reading achievement in their junior year of high school; see A. E. Cunningham and K. E. Stanovich, “Early Reading Acquisition and Its Relation to Reading Experience and Ability 10 Years Later,” <i>Developmental Psychology</i> 33, no. 6 (1997): 934–45.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c19_r1.xhtml#ftn-133">Language measures</a>: This statement reflects substantial research: Z. O. Weizman and C. E. Snow, “Lexical Input as Related to Children’s Vocabulary Acquisition: Effects of Sophisticated Exposure and Support for Meaning,” <i>Developmental Psychology</i> 37, no. 2 (2001): 265–79; F. J. Zimmerman, J. Gilkerson, et al., “Teaching by Listening: The Importance of Adult-Child Conversations to Language Development,” <i>Pediatrics</i> 124, no. 1 (2009): 342–49; V. A. Marchman and A. Fernald, “Speed of Word Recognition and Vocabulary Knowledge in Infancy Predict Cognitive and Language Outcomes in Later Childhood,” <i>Developmental Science</i> 11, no. 3 (2008): F9–16; S. Q. Cabell, L. M. Justice, et al., “Teacher–Child Conversations in Preschool Classrooms: Contributions to Children’s Vocabulary Development,” <i>Early Childhood Research Quarterly</i> 30, Part A (2015): 80–92; M. L. Rowe, S. W. Raudenbush, and S. Goldin-Meadow, “The Pace of Vocabulary Growth Helps Predict Later Vocabulary Skill,” <i>Child Development</i> 83, no. 2 (2012): 508–25; D. K. Dickinson and M. V. Porche, “Relation Between Language Experiences in Preschool Classrooms and Children’s Kindergarten and Fourth-Grade Language and Reading Abilities,” <i>Child Development</i> 82, no. 3 (2011): 870–86; V. N. Durand, I. M. Loe, et al., “Effects of Early Language, Speech, and Cognition on Later Reading: A Meditation Analysis,” <i>Frontiers in Psychology</i> 4 (2013): Article ID 586; C. Hulme, H. M. Nash, et al., “The Foundations of Literacy Development in Children at Familial Risk of Dyslexia,” <i>Psychology of Science</i> 26, no. 12 (2015): 1877–86.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c19_r1.xhtml#ftn-134">In a recent report</a>: J. M. Holahan, E. Ferrer, et al., “Growth in Reading Comprehension and Verbal Ability from Grades 1 through 9,” <i>Journal of Psychoeducational Assessment</i> 36, no. 4 (2016): 307–21.</p>
			<p class="note"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_560" title="560"/><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c19_r1.xhtml#ftn-135">Isabel Beck, professor emerita</a>: I. L. Beck, M. G. McKeown, and L. Kucan, <i>Bringing Words to Life,</i> 2nd ed. (New York: Guilford, 2013).</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c19_r1.xhtml#ftn-136">Vocabulary is best learned</a>: Experience has shown that it is best for the teacher to lead the discussion of a new word rather than have children guess at what the word means. Having students guess what the word means can lead them to give the wrong definition or remember the wrong definition rather than the correct one.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c19_r1.xhtml#ftn-137">This latter program</a>: The Academic Word List was released in the year 2000 and is available at <a href="https://www.victoria.ac.nz/lals/resources/academicwordlist">https://www.victoria.ac.nz/lals/resources/academicwordlist</a>.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c19_r1.xhtml#ftn-138">“the most critical element”</a>: S. Graham, C. A. MacArthur, and J. Fitzgerald (eds.), “Designing an Effective Writing Program,” in <i>Best Practices in Writing Instruction,</i> 2nd ed. (New York: Guilford, 2013), pp. 3–29. These authors have also contributed to the Educator’s Practice Guide “Teaching Elementary School Students to Be Effective Writers,” published by the What Works Clearinghouse, Jessup, MD, in 2012.</p>
			<h3 class="head"><b>CHAPTER 20: MICHELE’S PROGRAM: A MODEL THAT WORKS</b></h3>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c20_r1.xhtml#ftn-139">The Shaywitz DyslexiaScreen™</a>: The Shaywitz DyslexiaScreen™ is distributed by Pearson Publishing (<a href="http://www.pearsonclinical.com/shaywitz">www.pearsonclinical.com/shaywitz</a>). Please see <a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c13_r1.xhtml#page_170">this page</a> for a full description.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c20_r1.xhtml#ftn-140">Good evidence highlights the difference</a>: J. K. Torgesen et al., “Intensive Remedial Instruction for Children with Severe Reading Disabilities: Immediate and Long-Term Outcomes from Two Instructional Approaches,” <i>Journal of Learning Disabilities</i> 34 (2001): 33–58.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c20_r1.xhtml#ftn-141">In another study computers were used</a>: B. Wise and R. K. Olson, “Computer-Based Phonological Awareness and Reading Instruction,” <i>Annals of Dyslexia</i> 45 (1995): 99–122. This study demonstrated the importance of teachers even in computer-based reading instruction.</p>
			<h3 class="head"><b>CHAPTER 21: TEACHING THE DYSLEXIC CHILD TO READ</b></h3>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c21_r1.xhtml#ftn-142">The first two elements</a>: The What Works Clearinghouse found that phonological awareness training plus letter knowledge training had positive or potentially positive effects on print knowledge, phonological processing, and early reading and writing. At the same time, the WWC found it difficult to find commercially available programs incorporating the principles of phonological awareness training plus letter knowledge training that met their inclusion standards. In their words, “Phonological Awareness Training plus Letter Knowledge Training is a practice that does not have a single developer responsible for providing information or materials.”</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c21_r1.xhtml#ftn-143">For children in preschool or those in kindergarten</a>: These programs have been evaluated positively by the What Works Clearinghouse as having evidence to support their claims that they will improve phonemic awareness and phonics in young children.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c21_r1.xhtml#ftn-144">As I noted earlier</a>: The WWC found that phonological awareness training plus <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_561" title="561"/>letter knowledge training had positive or potentially positive effects on print knowledge, phonological processing, and early reading and writing.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c21_r1.xhtml#ftn-145">Certified Wilson instructors are required</a>: The What Works Clearinghouse Intervention Report—Wilson Reading System, p. 3, July 2, 2007.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c21_r1.xhtml#ftn-146">“unappreciated paucity of empirical support”</a>: C. R. Reynolds and S. E. Shaywitz, “Response to Intervention: Ready or Not? Or, From Wait-to-Fail to Watch-Them-Fail,” <i>School Psychology Quarterly</i> 24, no. 2 (2009): 130–45.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c21_r1.xhtml#ftn-147">The article highlighted</a>: “RTI Practice Falls Short of Promise: First Graders Who Were Identified for More Help Fell Further Behind,” <i>Education Week,</i> November 11, 2015. For the report, see Institute of Education Sciences, National Center for Educational Evaluation and Regional Assistance, “Evaluation of Response to Intervention Practices for Elementary School Reading,” November 2015.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c21_r1.xhtml#ftn-148">It is important that</a>: The purpose and contribution of screening instruments compared to progress-monitoring instruments should be differentiated. Screening instruments are developed to capture the major aspects of a condition. For example, in dyslexia it would be relating to academic, phonologic, and linguistic performance based on ongoing teacher observations from working with the student daily and validated by evidence—a study that compared the performance of dyslexic and nondyslexic students on this instrument. In contrast, progress-monitoring instruments track a student’s performance, typically on one aspect of his or her reading over time. In this case, the student is compared to himself or herself; there is no comparison between dyslexic and typical readers.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c21_r1.xhtml#ftn-149">I am proud to say</a>: The child’s teacher takes five to ten minutes to complete the Shaywitz DyslexiaScreen™, sharing her perceptions gained from working closely with the child. The teacher’s response on a tablet with immediate feedback of “at-risk” or “not at-risk” accurately and reliably identifies those children at-risk for dyslexia.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c21_r1.xhtml#ftn-150">Recent research emphasizes the importance of fluent reading</a>: Y. S. G. Kim and R. K. Wagner, “Text (Oral) Reading Fluency as a Construct in Reading Development: An Investigation of Its Mediating Role for Children from Grades 1 to 4,” <i>Scientific Studies of Reading</i> 19 (2015): 224–42.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c21_r1.xhtml#ftn-151">“While reading aloud to students”</a>: M. Kuhn, “Helping Students Become Accurate, Expressive Readers: Fluency Instruction for Small Groups,” <i>Reading Teacher</i> 58, no. 4 (2004/January 2005): 342.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c21_r1.xhtml#ftn-152">After sufficient practice</a>: D. R. Reutzel, “Hey Teacher, When You Say Fluency, What Do You Mean?,” in T. Rasinski, C. Blachowicz, and K. Lems (eds.), <i>Fluency Instruction,</i> 2nd ed. (New York: Guilford, 2012).</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c21_r1.xhtml#ftn-153">Comparisons showed that children who read aloud</a>: K. J. Topping, “Paired Reading: Impact of a Tutoring Method on Reading Accuracy, Comprehension and Fluency,” in Rasinski, Blachowicz, and Lems, <i>Fluency Instruction.</i></p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c21_r1.xhtml#ftn-154">I earlier detailed Isabel Beck’s three-tier framework</a>: I. L. Beck, M. G. McKeown, and L. Kucan, <i>Bringing Words to Life,</i> 2nd ed. (New York: Guilford, 2013).</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c21_r1.xhtml#ftn-155">To summarize</a>: Ibid.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c21_r1.xhtml#ftn-156">“The two primary goals”</a>: The program is available from Cambium/Sopris West, and Hochman teaches the course to teachers during a summer session at Windward School in White Plains, New York.</p>
			<h3 class="head"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_562" title="562"/><b>CHAPTER 26: SUCCEEDING IN POST-SECONDARY EDUCATION</b></h3>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c26_r1.xhtml#ftn-157">Instead, share with your child</a>: Yale Center for Dyslexia &amp; Creativity, <i>Dyslexia: Profiles of Success,</i> 3rd ed. (New Haven, 2016).</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c26_r1.xhtml#ftn-158">If your child appears stressed</a>: Based on review that appeared by D. M. Davis and J. A. Hayes, “What Are the Benefits of Mindfulness: A Practice Review of Psychotherapy-related Research,” <i>Psychotherapy</i> 48, no. 2 (2011): 198–208.</p>
			<h3 class="head"><b>CHAPTER 27: SELECTING A COLLEGE</b></h3>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c27_r1.xhtml#ftn-159">In a far larger follow-up study</a>: W. Hiss and V. Franks, “Defining Promise: Optional Standardized Testing Policies in American College and University Admissions,” National Association for College Admissions Counseling, 2014.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c27_r1.xhtml#ftn-160">This has the unfortunate potential consequence</a>: Renee Dudley, “Despite Warnings, College Board Redesigned SAT in Way That May Hurt Neediest Students,” September 21, 2016, <a href="http://www.reuters.com/investigates/special-report/college-sat-redesign/">http://www.reuters.com/investigates/special-report/college-sat-redesign/</a>, accessed 11/24/19.</p>
			<h3 class="head"><b>CHAPTER 29: HELPING ADULTS BECOME BETTER READERS</b></h3>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c29_r1.xhtml#ftn-161">Lack of literacy is a major national concern</a>: M. Kutner, E. Greenberg, et al., “The Health Literacy of America’s Adults: Results from the 2003 National Assessment of Adult Literacy” (NCES 2006-483). U.S. Department of Education, Washington, DC: National Center for Education Statistics.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c29_r1.xhtml#ftn-162">At least a ninth-grade</a>: As defined by the National Center for Education Statistics, low literacy is typically regarded as having below a fifth-grade reading level.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c29_r1.xhtml#ftn-163">In a recent paper Bennett, I</a>: D. Herrera-Araujo, B. A. Shaywitz, et al., “Evaluating Willingness to Pay as a Measure of the Impact of Dyslexia in Adults,” <i>Journal of Benefit and Cost Analysis</i> 8, no. 1 (2017): 24–48; Renee Dudley, “Despite Warnings, College Board Redesigned SAT in Way That May Hurt Neediest Students,” September 21, 2016, <a href="https://www.reuters.com/investigates/special-report/college-sat-redesign">https://www.reuters.com/investigates/special-report/college-sat-redesign</a>, accessed 9/11/19.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c29_r1.xhtml#ftn-164">There are two national, online, Zip Code–based directories</a>: Acknowledgment is made to Heidi Silver-Pacuilla, Ph.D. (team leader, Applied Innovation and Improvement) at the U.S. Department of Education, and to Brenda Dann-Messier, formerly of this section at the DOE, for their insights and information.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c29_r1.xhtml#ftn-165">Studies have found</a>: D. Greenberg, J. C. Wise, et al., “Persisters and Nonpersisters: Identifying the Characteristics of Who Stays and Who Leaves from Adult Literacy Interventions,” <i>Reading &amp; Writing</i> 26, no. 4 (2013): 494–514.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c29_r1.xhtml#ftn-166">Reflecting the imprint of the CCSS</a>: Taken from Susan Pimentel, “College and Career Readiness Standards for Adult Education,” U.S. Department of Education, Office of Vocational and Adult Education, 2013.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c29_r1.xhtml#ftn-167">A GED practice test is available</a>: A note of possible concern for how the revised CCSS GED test will affect dyslexic test-takers: The CCSS is based on students’ having very good decoding and fluency skills, leading to a high level of comprehension. Many, including myself, believe that the CCSS-based PARCC and Smart Balance tests given to students in early grades are inappropriate and damaging because these students, in, for example, third grade, have not yet mastered <span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_563" title="563"/>fluency. The worry is that many of the adults taking the GED did not attend school when teaching basic reading skills was a focus and may be penalized by the new GED. The “College and Career Readiness Standards for Adult Education” states that “the Standards are not meant to specify the full spectrum of support and interventions appropriate for English language learners and students with special needs to meet these standards, nor do they mirror the significant diversity of students’ learning needs, abilities, and achievement levels.” It is unclear what this means and, most important, how it will be interpreted in terms of the needs of and what is actually available to dyslexic test-takers.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c29_r1.xhtml#ftn-168">“The diagnosis changed every way”</a>: Camp Spring Creek blog, April 15, 2014, Interview: Esteemed author Amanda Kyle Williams, <a href="http://campspringcreek.org/our-blog/2014/04/15/interview-esteemed-author-amanda-kyle-williams">http://campspringcreek.org/our-blog/2014/04/15/interview-esteemed-author-amanda-kyle-williams</a>, accessed 9/11/19.</p>
			<h3 class="head"><b>CHAPTER 30: ANXIETY, ADHD, AND DYSLEXIA</b></h3>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c30_r1.xhtml#ftn-169">Anxiety and ADHD so commonly occur</a>: Dyslexia and ADHD occur together more frequently than expected by chance, with 25 to 40 percent of children with one disorder meeting criteria for the other; see G. J. August and B. D. Garfinkel, “Comorbidity of ADHD and Reading Disability Among Clinic-Referred Children,” <i>Journal of Abnormal Child Psychology</i> 18 (1990): 29–45; M. Semrud-Clickeman, J. Biederman, et. al., “Comorbidity Between ADHD and Learning Disability: A Review and Report in a Clinically Referred Sample,” <i>Journal of the American Academy of Child &amp; Adolescent Psychiatry</i> 31 (1992): 439–48; E. G. Willcutt and B. F. Pennington, “Psychiatric Comorbidity in Children and Adolescents with Reading Disability,” <i>Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry</i> 41 (2000): 1039–48. Similarly, good evidence indicates that anxiety disorders are more common in children with dyslexia; see J. Carroll, B. Maughan, et al., “Literacy Difficulties and Psychiatric Disorders: Evidence for Comorbidity,” <i>Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry</i> 46 (2005): 524–32.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c30_r1.xhtml#ftn-170">“Marked fear”</a>: <i>Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental Disorders,</i> 5th ed., 2013.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c30_r1.xhtml#ftn-171">Sam’s problems with word retrieval</a>: W. J. Levelt, A. Roelofs, and A. S. Meyer, “A Theory of Lexical Access in Speech Production,” <i>Behavioral and Brain Sciences</i> 22 (1999): 1–75; S. Hanly, “Tip-of-the-Tongue and Word Retrieval Deficits in Dyslexia,” <i>Journal of Learning Disabilities</i> 43 (2010): 15.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c30_r1.xhtml#ftn-172">The medications effective</a>: The neurotransmitters are released at the ends of nerve terminals into a place between nerves called the synaptic cleft. The transmitters released then stimulate another nerve to fire. The excess neurotransmitters released are then inactivated by being taken up by the nerve terminal. The neurotransmitters important in anxiety include serotonin and the excitatory catecholamine neurotransmitters, including norepinephrine and dopamine.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c30_r1.xhtml#ftn-173">The core first-line medications</a>: SSRIs inhibit serotonin reuptake in the presynaptic cleft and thus increase the extracellular level of serotonin in the brain.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c30_r1.xhtml#ftn-174">Another class of medications</a>: Benzodiazepines work by enhancing the effect of the inhibitory neurotransmitter gamma-aminobutyric acid (GABA) at the GABA-A receptor. This results in an anxiolytic and calming effect.</p>
			<p class="note"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_564" title="564"/><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c30_r1.xhtml#ftn-175">An equally important treatment</a>: S. N. Compton et al., “Cognitive-Behavioral Psychotherapy for Anxiety and Depressive Disorders in Children and Adolescents: An Evidence-Based Medicine Review,” <i>Journal of the American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry</i> 43 (2004): 930–59.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c30_r1.xhtml#ftn-176">As discussed in Carol Dweck’s insightful book</a>: C. Dweck, <i>Mindset: The New Psychology of Success</i> (New York: Ballantine, 2018).</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c30_r1.xhtml#ftn-177">At the same time</a>: For children who have had reading struggles and improve significantly in their reading, parents (and teachers) looking back at times wonder if attentional difficulties were there all along but were pushed to the background because of the dyslexic student’s overwhelming reading difficulties.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c30_r1.xhtml#ftn-178">Recent reports suggest that</a>: B. Bental and E. Tirosh, “The Effects of Methylphenidate on Word Decoding Accuracy in Boys with Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder,” <i>Journal of Clinical Psychopharmacology</i> 28 (2008): 89–92; N. Grizenko, M. Bhat, et al., “Efficacy of Methylphenidate in Children with Attention-Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder and Learning Disabilities: A Randomized Crossover Trial,” <i>Journal of Psychiatry and Neuroscience</i> 31 (2006): 46–51; E. H. Keulers, J. G. Hendriksen, et al., “Methylphenidate Improves Reading Performance in Children with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity Disorder and Comorbid Dyslexia: An Unblinded Clinical Trial,” <i>European Journal of Paediatric Neurology</i> 11 (2007): 21–28; D. Williamson, D. W. Murray, et al., “Methylphenidate in Children with ADHD With or Without Learning Disability,” <i>Journal of Attention Disorders</i> 18 (2014): 95–104.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c30_r1.xhtml#ftn-179">Two small clinical trials</a>: C. R. Sumner, S. Gathercole, et al., “Atomoxetine for the Treatment of Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) in Children with ADHD and Dyslexia,” <i>Child and Adolescent Psychiatry and Mental Health</i> 3 (2009): 40; C. G. de Jong, S. Van De Voorde, et al., “Differential Effects of Atomoxetine on Executive Functioning and Lexical Decision in Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder and Reading Disorder,” <i>Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychopharmacology</i> 19 (2009): 699–707.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c30_r1.xhtml#ftn-180">More recently, we examined the effect</a>: S. Shaywitz, B. Shaywitz, et al., “Effect of Atomoxetine Treatment on Reading and Phonological Skills in Children with Dyslexia or Attention-Deficit/Hyperactivity Disorder and Comorbid Dyslexia in a Randomized, Placebo-Controlled Trial,” <i>Journal of Child and Adolescent Psychopharmacology</i> 27, no. 1 (2017): 19–28.</p>
			<h3 class="head"><b>CHAPTER 31: THE ROLE OF TECHNOLOGY</b></h3>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c31_r1.xhtml#ftn-181">“Many schools still use”</a>: “Designing an Effective Writing Program,” in <i>Best Practices in Writing Instruction,</i> S. Graham, C. A. MacArthur, and J. Fitzgerald (eds.), 2nd ed. (New York: Guilford, 2013), pp. 3–29. These authors have also contributed to the Educator’s Practice Guide “Teaching Elementary School Students to Be Effective Writers,” published by What Works Clearinghouse in 2012.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c31_r1.xhtml#ftn-182">In studies of eighth- and ninth-graders</a>: J. Montali and L. Lewandowski, “Bimodal Reading: Benefits of a Talking Computer for Average and Less Skilled Readers,” <i>Journal of Learning Disabilities</i> 29, no. 3 (1996): 271–79.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c31_r1.xhtml#ftn-183">But a negative effect</a>: E. Staels and W. Van den Broeck, “Orthographic Learning and the Role of Text-to-Speech Software in Dutch Disabled Readers,” <i>Journal of Learning Disabilities</i> 48, no. 1 (2015): 39–50.</p>
			<h3 class="head"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_565" title="565"/><b>CHAPTER 32: ACCOMMODATIONS: BUILDING A BRIDGE TO SUCCESS</b></h3>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c32_r1.xhtml#ftn-184">If you are a dyslexic reader, accommodations</a>: According to the U.S. Department of Justice, Civil Rights Division, Disability Rights Section, “Testing accommodations are changes to the regular testing environment and auxiliary aids and services that allow individuals with disabilities to demonstrate their true aptitude or achievement level on standardized exams or other high-stakes tests. Examples of the wide range of testing accommodations that may be required include: Screen reading technology; Extended time; and Distraction-free rooms,” <a href="https://www.ada.gov/regs2014/testing_accommodations.html">https://www.ada.gov/regs2014/testing_accommodations.html</a>, accessed 9/14/19.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c32_r1.xhtml#ftn-185">“The patterns of deficits”</a>: M. Bruck, “Outcomes of Adults with Childhood Histories of Dyslexia,” in C. Hulme and R. M. Joshi (eds.), <i>Reading and Spelling: Development and Disorders</i> (Mahwah, NJ: Erlbaum, 1998), pp. 179–200, quote on p. 197.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c32_r1.xhtml#ftn-186">Brain imaging studies in adults with dyslexia</a>: F. Richlan, M. Kronbichler, and H. Wimmer, “Meta-analyzing Brain Dysfunctions in Dyslexic Children and Adults,” <i>Neuroimage</i> 56 (2011): 1735–42.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c32_r1.xhtml#ftn-187">Only students diagnosed as dyslexic</a>: M. K. Runyan, “The Effect of Extra Time on Reading Comprehension Scores for University Students With and Without Learning Disabilities,” in S. E. Shaywitz and B. A. Shaywitz (eds.), <i>Attention Deficit Disorder Comes of Age: Toward the Twenty-First Century</i> (Austin: Pro-Ed, 1992), pp. 185–95; S. M. Weaver, “The Efficacy of Extended Time on Tests for Postsecondary Students with Learning Disabilities,” <i>Learning Disabilities</i> 10 (2000): 47–56.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c32_r1.xhtml#ftn-188">The Blue Ribbon Panel</a>: “The Flagging Test Scores of Individuals Who Are Granted the Accommodation of Extended Time: A Report of the Majority Opinion of the Blue Ribbon Panel on Flagging,” July 15, 2001, <a href="https://dralegal.org/case/breimhorst-v-ets/">https://dralegal.org/case/breimhorst-v-ets/</a>, accessed 9/11/19.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c32_r1.xhtml#ftn-189">In a recent article</a>: F. Romberg, B. A. Shaywitz, and S. E. Shaywitz, “How Should Medical Schools Respond to Students with Dyslexia?,” <i>AMA Journal of Ethics</i> 18, no. 10 (2016): 975–84.</p>
			<h3 class="head"><b>CHAPTER 33: THE LAW IS ON YOUR SIDE</b></h3>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c33_r1.xhtml#ftn-190">This legal definition</a>: U.S. Senate Resolution 680 (2018) was sponsored by Senators Cassidy, Murphy, Capito, Warren, and Van Hollen, and was passed by unanimous consent. The full text is in the Appendix.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c33_r1.xhtml#ftn-191">This up-to-date definition</a>: U.S. House of Representatives Committee on Science, Space, and Technology hearing, “The Science of Dyslexia,” September 18, 2014, <a href="http://dyslexia.yale.edu/advocacy/national-advocacy/science-of-dyslexia-hearing/">dyslexia.yale.edu/advocacy/national-advocacy/science-of-dyslexia-hearing/</a> 9/14/19.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c33_r1.xhtml#ftn-192">Senate HELP Committee</a>: U.S. Senate Health Education Labor and Pensions (HELP) Committee, “Understanding Dyslexia: The Intersection of Scientific Research &amp; Education,” May 10, 2016, <a href="http://dyslexia.yale.edu/ABOUT_Shaywitz_May2016.html">dyslexia.yale.edu/ABOUT_Shaywitz_May2016.html</a>, accessed 9/14/19.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c33_r1.xhtml#ftn-193">One of those fourteen</a>: The historical background and current issues of IDEA are reviewed in Professor Ruth Colker’s excellent book <i>Disabled Education</i> (New York: New York University Press, 2013).</p>
			<p class="note"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_566" title="566"/><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c33_r1.xhtml#ftn-194">The Americans with Disabilities Act (ADA)</a>: 42 USCA § 12132 is the codification of Title II of the ADA, which prohibits disability discrimination by public entities. The implementing regulations are found at 28 CFR § 35.101 et seq. The Department of Justice is the responsible agency. 42 USCA § 12182 is the codification of Title III of the ADA, which prohibits disability discrimination by private entities that operate places of public accommodation. The implementing regulations are found at 28 CFR § 36.101 et seq. Again, the DOJ is the primary agency.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c33_r1.xhtml#ftn-195">Section 504</a>: 29 USCA § 794 is the codification of Section 504 of the Rehabilitation Act of 1973 (as amended). Section 504 prohibits discrimination on the basis of disability by recipients of federal funds. The regulations at 34 CFR part 104 et seq. are the implementing regulations for Section 504. The responsible agency is the Department of Education’s Office for Civil Rights (OCR).</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c33_r1.xhtml#ftn-196">The first step</a>: Helpful information about the IEP can be found in R. Colker and J. K. Waterstone, <i>Special Education Advocacy</i> (Albany, NY: Mathew Bender, 2011), in L. M. Siegel, <i>Nolo’s IEP Guide</i> (Berkeley: LexisNexis Group, 2011).</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c33_r1.xhtml#ftn-197">The law requires</a>: These requirements are from Colker and Waterstone, <i>Special Education Advocacy,</i> pp. 159–60.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c33_r1.xhtml#ftn-198">In 2016, the U.S. Department of Justice</a>: See <a href="https://www.ada.gov/regs2016/adaaa.html">https://www.ada.gov/regs2016/adaaa.html</a>, accessed 9/14/19.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c33_r1.xhtml#ftn-199">Here are its most important elements</a>: Ibid., p. 3.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c33_r1.xhtml#ftn-200">“dyslexia and other learning disabilities”</a>: Ibid., p. 76.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c33_r1.xhtml#ftn-201"><i>“should not demand extensive analysis”</i></a>: Ibid., p. 81.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c33_r1.xhtml#ftn-202">“this bill makes the definition of disability more generous”</a>: Ibid., pp. 82–83.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c33_r1.xhtml#ftn-203">In a press release</a>: Settlement Agreement Between United States of America and National Board of Medical Examiners, DJ# 202-16-181, <a href="https://www.ada.gov/nbme.htm">https://www.ada.gov/nbme.htm</a>, accessed 9/14/19.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c33_r1.xhtml#ftn-204">A 2011 Government Accountability Office</a>: Higher Education and Disability: Improved Federal Enforcement Needed to Better Protect Students’ Rights to Testing Accommodations,” <a href="https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-12-40">https://www.gao.gov/products/GAO-12-40</a>, November 29, 2011, accessed 11/24/19.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c33_r1.xhtml#ftn-205">“LSAC shall ensure”</a>: “Law School Admission Council Agrees to Systemic Reforms and $7.73 Million Payment to Settle Justice Department’s Nationwide Disability Discrimination Lawsuit,” May 20, 2014, <a href="https://www.ada.gov/dfeh_v_lsac/lsac_consentdecree.htm">https://www.ada.gov/dfeh_v_lsac/lsac_consentdecree.htm</a>, accessed 9/14/19.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c33_r1.xhtml#ftn-206">Sadly, there are some indications</a>: As reported in the <i>Daily Journal California Lawyer</i> (July 19, 2018), LSAC is being sued by the California Department of Fair Employment and Housing for violating an agreement to “better handle” accommodation requests for the LSAT, Lyle Moran, “State Seeks Lawyer Fees from LSAT Administrator.”</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c33_r1.xhtml#ftn-207">A blue ribbon panel</a>: The findings of the panel are reported in “The Flagging of Test Scores of Individuals Who Are Granted the Accommodation of Extended Time: A Report of the Majority Opinion of the Blue-Ribbon Panel on Flagging,” available at <a href="https://dralegal.org/case/breimhorst-v-ets/">https://dralegal.org/case/breimhorst-v-ets/</a>, accessed 9/11/19.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c33_r1.xhtml#ftn-208">On July 15, 2002</a>: Ibid.</p>
			<p class="note"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_567" title="567"/><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c33_r1.xhtml#ftn-209">At the next level</a>: Lani Guinier, a professor at Harvard Law School, reports that differences in scores obtained on the LSAT explain less than 14 percent of the differences in student grades during the first year of law school. See L. Guinier, M. Fine, and J. Balin, <i>Becoming Gentlemen</i> (Boston: Beacon Press, 1997).</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c33_r1.xhtml#ftn-210">“relax or even eliminate”</a>: U.S. District Judge Bernard A. Friedman as quoted in “Law School Admission Council Aims to Quash Overreliance on LSAT,” Jess Bravin, <i>Wall Street Journal,</i> March 29, 2001.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c33_r1.xhtml#ftn-211">“an end to the use”</a>: Diana Jean Schemo, “Head of U. of California Seeks to End SAT Use in Admissions,” <i>New York Times,</i> February 17, 2001.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c33_r1.xhtml#ftn-212">Elaine M. Allensworth and Kallie Clark, “High School GPAs and ACT Scores as Predictors of College Completion</a>: Examining Assumptions About Consistency Across High Schools,” <i>Educational Researcher,</i> January 27, 2020, DOI: 10.3102/0013189X20902110</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c33_r1.xhtml#ftn-213">as of 2018, there were over</a>: “More Than 1000 Accredited Colleges and Universities That Do Not Use ACT/SAT Scores to Admit Substantial Numbers of Students into Bachelor-Degree Programs, FairTest,” The National Center for Fair and Open Testing, current as of Fall 2019, <a href="https://www.fairtest.org/university/optional">https://www.fairtest.org/university/optional</a>, accessed 9/14/19.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c33_r1.xhtml#ftn-214">As for higher levels</a>: R. C. Davidson and E. Lewis, “Affirmative Action and Other Special Consideration Admissions at the University of California, Davis, School of Medicine,” <i>Journal of the American Medical Association</i> 278 (1997): 1153–58.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c33_r1.xhtml#ftn-215">“UC Davis applicants who qualified”</a>: Editorial, Davidson and Lewis, “Medical School Admissions Criteria: The Needs of Patients Matter,” <i>Journal of the American Medical Association</i> 278 (1997): 1196–99.</p>
			<h3 class="head"><b>CHAPTER 34: A PERSON LIKE THAT…</b></h3>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c34_r1.xhtml#ftn-216">David Boies is brilliant</a>: D. Margolick, “The Man Who Ate Microsoft,” <i>Vanity Fair,</i> March 2000.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c34_r1.xhtml#ftn-217">This belief that socioeconomic problems</a>: The harm that this mindset can lead to is exemplified by the experience of Dr. Fred Romberg, whom the USMLE refused to provide accommodations because he was born and grew up “disadvantaged” and this explained all his reading problems. As you may recall, we tested him and found he was incredibly intelligent and very dyslexic. This opened up a whole new world for him. He was able to receive accommodations and with the additional time passed his USMLE exam and is now a practicing physician.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c34_r1.xhtml#ftn-218">Ask anyone knowledgeable</a>: Matthew Herper, “Going to Church,” <i>Forbes,</i> August 9, 2015.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c34_r1.xhtml#ftn-219">As a consequence</a>: Peter Miller, “News, The Innovators Project: George Church, The Future Without Limits,” <i>National Geographic,</i> 2015, <a href="https://www.nationalgeographic.com/news/innovators/2014/06/140602-george-church-innovation-biology-science-genetics-de-extinction/">https://www.nationalgeographic.com/news/innovators/2014/06/140602-george-church-innovation-biology-science-genetics-de-extinction/</a>, accessed 2/26/15.</p>
			<p class="note"><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c34_r1.xhtml#ftn-220">That same year</a>: M. Lewis, <i>The Undoing Project: A Friendship That Changed Our Minds</i> (New York: Norton, 2007), p. 280.</p>
			<p class="note"><span epub:type="pagebreak" id="page_568" title="568"/><a href="Shay_9780307558893_epub3_c34_r1.xhtml#ftn-221">“He’s made economics more human”</a>: Peter Gärdenfors of Lund University, announcing the award of the Nobel Memorial Prize in Economic Sciences to Richard H. Thaler, <a href="https://ccl.ht.lu.se/2017/10/hes-made-economics-more-human">https://ccl.ht.lu.se/2017/10/hes-made-economics-more-human</a>, accessed 9/14/19.</p>
		</div>
	</body>
</html>